PAGE 1
1
Laws 
of the Game
23/24
Laws of the Game   2023/24

PAGE 2
2


PAGE 3
3


PAGE 4
4
Effective from 1 st July 2023
This booklet may not be reproduced or translated in whole or in part in any manner  
without the permission of The International Football Association Board.
The International Football Association Board
Münstergasse 9, 8001 Zurich, Switzerland
T: +41 (0)44 245 1886, F: +41 (0)44 245 1887
www.theifab.com 

PAGE 5
5
Laws 
of the Game
2023/24

PAGE 6
6
Contents
About the Laws
Notes and modifications
Notes on the Laws of the Game
General modifications
Guidelines for temporary dismissals (sin bins)
Guidelines for return substitutes
Laws of the Game 2023/24
1 The Field of Play
2 The Ball
3 The Players
4 The Players’ Equipment
5 The Referee
6 The Other Match Officials
7 The Duration of the Match
8 The Start and Restart of Play
9 The Ball in and out of Play
10 Determining the Outcome of a Match
11 Offside
12 Fouls and Misconduct
13 Free Kicks
14 The Penalty Kick
15 The Throw-in
16 The Goal Kick
17 The Corner Kick
9
16
17
20
22
26
29
31
41
45
53
59
69
77
81
85
87
93
99
115
119
125
129
133


PAGE 7
7
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Contents
Video assistant referee (VAR) protocol
FIFA Quality Programme
Law changes 2023/24 
Outline summary of Law changes
Details of all Law changes
Glossary
Football bodies
Football terms
Referee terms
Practical guidelines for match officials
Introduction
Positioning, movement and teamwork
Body language, communication and whistle
Other advice
136
146
150 
151
154
162
163
164
174
176
177
178
192
198


PAGE 8
8


PAGE 9
9
About  
the Laws

PAGE 10
10


PAGE 11
11
 Football is the greatest sport on earth. It is played on every continent, in every 
country and at many different levels. The fact that the Laws of the Game are the 
same for all football throughout the world, from the FIFA World Cup™ through 
to a game between young children in a remote village, is a considerable 
strength which must continue to be harnessed for the good of football 
everywhere.
 Football must have Laws which keep the game fair – this is a crucial foundation 
of the ‘beautiful game’ and a vital feature of the ‘spirit’ of the game. The best 
matches are those where the referee is rarely needed because the players play 
with respect for each other, the match officials and the Laws.
 Football’s Laws are relatively simple compared to most other team sports, but 
as many situations are subjective and match officials are human, some 
decisions will inevitably be wrong or cause debate and discussion. For some 
people, this discussion is part of the game’s enjoyment and attraction but, 
whether decisions are right or wrong, the ‘spirit’ of the game requires that 
referees’ decisions must always be respected. All those in authority, especially 
coaches and team captains, have a clear responsibility to the game to respect 
the match officials and their decisions. 
 The Laws cannot deal with every possible situation, so where there is no direct 
provision in the Laws, The IFAB expects the referee to make a decision within 
the ‘spirit’ of the game and the Laws – this often involves asking the question, 
‘what would football want/expect?’
 The Laws must also contribute to the safety and welfare of players and it is  
The IFAB’s responsibility to react quickly and appropriately to support the 
game’s participants, through the Laws themselves , when the need arises. For 
example, a temporary amendment to Law 3 was introduced in response to the 
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  About the Laws
The philosophy and spirit 
of the Laws


PAGE 12
12
COVID-19 pandemic to give top competitions the option of increasing the 
maximum number of substitutions for each team from three to five. That 
amendment became  part of the Laws of the Game in 2022. Trials are also 
continuing with additional ‘concussion substitutes’ so that teams can prioritise 
the welfare of a player who has an actual or suspected concussion without 
suffering a numerical disadvantage.
 Accidents inevitably occur, but the Laws aim to help make the game as safe as 
possible, balancing player welfare and sporting fairness. This requires referees 
to use the Laws to deal strongly with those players whose actions are too 
aggressive or dangerous. The Laws embody the unacceptability of unsafe play 
in their disciplinary phrases, such as ‘reckless challenge’ and ‘endangering the 
safety of an opponent’ or ‘using excessive force’ .
 To promote a greater understanding of the Laws, The IFAB has published 
‘Football Rules – simplified Laws of the Game’ , which have been written to 
make the Laws easier to understand, especially for young people, potential or 
newly qualified referees, adults who referee occasionally, players, coaches 
(including those working towards a coaching qualification), spectators and the 
media.
 Visit www.footballrules.com  to access or download Football Rules, which can 
be sorted alphabetically or by category.

PAGE 13
13
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Introduction


PAGE 14
14
Managing changes  
to the Laws 
 Football must remain attractive and enjoyable for players, match officials and 
coaches, as well as spectators, fans and administrators, regardless of age, 
gender, race, religion, culture, ethnicity, sexual orientation or disability. 
 Therefore, for a Law to be changed, The IFAB and all its bodies that are 
involved in the decision-making process must be convinced that the change 
will benefit the game; this sometimes means that the potential change needs to 
be tested. 
 For every proposed change, the focus is on fairness, integrity, respect, safety, 
the enjoyment of participants and spectators and, where appropriate, using 
technology to enhance the game. 
 The IFAB will continue to engage with the global football community so that 
changes to the Laws benefit football at all levels and in every corner of the 
world, and so that the integrity of the game, the Laws and the match officials 
are respected, valued and protected.

PAGE 15
15
 The IFAB will carry on its work with its advisory panels and its extensive 
consultation efforts, with a continued focus on player welfare, feedback from 
the ‘concussion substitute’ trial and making the game fairer and more 
attractive to take part in and watch.
 It is also important to maintain the ‘universality’ of the Laws so that young 
players can watch matches on television and then go out and try to recreate 
what they have seen.
 The IFAB greatly enjoys engaging with people throughout the world and we are 
always very pleased to receive suggestions or questions relating to the Laws of 
the Game. Indeed, many recent Law changes have originated from suggestions 
from people from many different parts of the world.
 We hope to engage more easily and extensively in the future, so please check 
for details on our website: www.theifab.com . 
 Please continue to send your suggestions, ideas and questions to: 
lawenquiries@theifab.com . 
The future
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  About the Laws

PAGE 16
Notes and 
modifications

PAGE 17
17Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Notes and modifications
 Official languages
 The IFAB publishes the Laws of the Game in English, French, German  
and Spanish. If there is any divergence in the wording, the English text is 
authoritative.
 Other languages
 National FAs which translate the Laws of the Game can obtain the layout 
template for the 2023/24 edition of the Laws from The IFAB by contacting:  
info@theifab.com .
 National FAs which produce a translated version of the Laws of the Game  
using this format are invited to send a copy to The IFAB (stating clearly on  
the front cover that it is that national FA’s official translation) so it can be 
posted on The IFAB’s website for use by others.
Measurements
 If there is any divergence between metric and imperial units, the metric units 
are authoritative. 
 Applying the Laws 
 The same Laws apply in every match in every confederation, country,  
town and village and, apart from the modifications permitted by The IFAB  
(see ‘General modifications ’), the Laws must not be modified or changed , 
except with the permission of The IFAB.
 Those who are educating match officials and other participants should 
emphasise that:
•  referees should apply the Laws within the ‘spirit’ of the game to help 
produce fair and safe matches
Notes on the Laws  
of the Game

PAGE 18
18
•  everyone must respect the match officials and their decisions, remembering 
and respecting that referees are human and will make mistakes
 Players have a major responsibility for the image of the game and the team 
captain should play an important role in helping to ensure that the Laws and 
referees’ decisions are respected.
 Key
 The main Law changes are underlined in yellow  and highlighted in the margin.  
Editorial changes are underlined . 
YC = yellow card (caution); RC = red card (sending-off).

PAGE 19
19


PAGE 20
20
  The universality of the Laws of the Game means that the game is essentially  
the same in every part of the world and at every level. As well as creating a 
‘fair’ and safe environment in which the game is played, the Laws should also 
promote participation and enjoyment. 
 Historically, The IFAB has allowed national football associations (FAs) some 
flexibility to modify the ‘organisational’ Laws for specific categories of football.  
The IFAB strongly believes that national FAs should be able to modify some 
aspects of the way football is organised if it will benefit football in their own 
country. 
 How the game is played and refereed should be the same on every football field 
in the world, from the FIFA World Cup™ final to the smallest village. However, 
the needs of a country’s domestic football should determine how long the game 
lasts, how many people can take part and how some unfair behaviour is 
punished. 
 All national FAs (and confederations and FIFA) have the option to modify all or 
some of the following organisational areas of the Laws of the Game for football 
for which they are responsible:
For all levels of the game:
•  the number of substitutions each team is permitted to use up to a maximum 
of five*, except in youth football, where the maximum will be determined by 
the national association, confederation or FIFA
 *See also Law 3 for the conditions that apply to matches that go to extra time 
and details on the restriction on substitution opportunities.
General modifications

PAGE 21
21
For youth, veterans, disability and grassroots football:
• size of the field of play
• size, weight and material of the ball
• width between the goalposts and height of the crossbar from the ground
•  duration of the two (equal) halves of the game (and two equal halves of  
extra time) 
• the use of return substitutes
• the use of temporary dismissals (sin bins) for some/all cautions (YCs)
 In addition, to allow national FAs further flexibility to benefit and develop their 
domestic football, the following changes relating to ‘categories’ of football are 
permitted:
•  national FAs, confederations and FIFA have the flexibility to decide the age 
restrictions for youth and veterans football
•  each national FA will determine which competitions at the lowest levels of 
football are designated as ‘grassroots’ football
Permission for other modifications
 National FAs have the option to approve different modifications for different 
competitions – there is no requirement to apply them universally or to apply 
them all. However, no other modifications are allowed without the permission of 
The IFAB. 
 National FAs are asked to inform The IFAB of their use of these modifications, 
and at which levels, as this information, and especially the reason(s) why the 
modifications are being used, may identify development ideas or strategies 
which The IFAB can share to assist the development of football in other 
national FAs.
 The IFAB would also be very interested to hear about other potential 
modification s to the Laws of the Game which could increase participation,  
make football more attractive and promote its worldwide development.
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Notes and modifications

PAGE 22
22
 The 131 st AGM of The IFAB held in London on 3 rd March 2017 approved the use 
of temporary dismissals (sin bins) for all or some cautions/yellow cards (YCs) 
in youth, veterans, disability and grassroots football, subject to the approval of 
the competition’s national FA, confederation or FIFA, whichever is appropriate. 
 Reference to temporary dismissals is found in:
 Law 5 – The Referee (Powers and duties):  
Disciplinary action
 The referee has the power to show yellow or red cards and, where competition 
rules permit, temporarily dismiss a player, from entering the field at the start 
of the match until after the match has ended, including during the half-time 
interval, extra time and penalties (penalty shoot-out) .
 A temporary dismissal is when a player commits a cautionable (YC) offence and 
is punished by an immediate ‘suspension’ from participating in the next part of 
that match. The philosophy is that an ‘instant punishment’ can have a 
significant and immediate positive influence on the behaviour of the offending 
player and, potentially, the player’s team.
 The national FA, confederation or FIFA should approve (for publication in  
the competition rules) a temporary dismissal protocol within the following 
guidelines:
Players only
•  Temporary dismissals apply to all players (including goalkeepers) but not for 
cautionable offences (YCs) committed by a substitute or substituted player
Guidelines for temporary 
dismissals (sin bins) 

PAGE 23
23
Referee’s signal
•  The referee will indicate a temporary dismissal by showing a yellow card 
(YC) and then clearly pointing with both arms to the temporary dismissal 
area (usually the player’s technical area)
The temporary dismissal period
• The length of the temporary dismissal is the same for all offences 
•  The length of the temporary dismissal should be between 10–15% of the 
total playing time (e.g. 10 minutes in a 90-minute match; 8 minutes in an 
80-minute match)
•  The temporary dismissal period begins when play restarts after the player 
has left the field of play 
•  The referee should include in the temporary dismissal period any time ‘lost’ 
for a stoppage for which ‘additional time’ will be allowed at the end of the 
half (e.g. substitution, injury etc...)
•  Competitions must decide who will help the referee time the dismissal 
period – it could be the responsibility of a delegate, fourth official or neutral 
assistant referee; conversely it could be a team official 
•  Once the temporary dismissal period has been completed, the player can 
return from the touchline with the referee’s permission, which can be given 
while the ball is in play
•  The referee has the final decision as to when the player can return
•  A temporarily dismissed player cannot be substituted until the end of the 
temporary dismissal period (but not if the team has used all its permitted 
substitutes)
•  If a temporary dismissal period has not been completed at the end of  
the first half (or the end of the second half when extra time is to be played) 
the remaining part of the temporary dismissal period is served from the start 
of the second half (start of extra time)
•  A player who is still serving a temporary dismissal at the end of the match is 
permitted to take part in penalties (penalty shoot-out)  
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Notes and modifications

PAGE 24
24
Temporary dismissal area
•  A temporarily dismissed player should remain within the technical area 
(where one exists) or with the team’s coach/technical staff, unless ‘warming 
up’ (under the same conditions as a substitute)
Offences during a temporary dismissal
•  A temporarily dismissed player who commits a cautionable (YC) or 
sending-off (RC) offence during their temporary dismissal period will take 
no further part in the match and may not be replaced or substituted 
Further disciplinary action
•  Competitions/national FAs will decide if temporary dismissals must be 
reported to the appropriate authorities and whether any further disciplinary 
action may be taken e.g. suspension for accumulating a number of temporary 
dismissals, as with cautions (YCs)
Temporary dismissal systems
A competition may use one of the following temporary dismissal systems: 
• System A – for all cautions (YCs) 
• System B – for some but not all cautions (YCs) 
System A – temporary dismissal for all cautions (YCs)
• All cautions (YCs) are punished with a temporary dismissal
• A player who receives a second caution (YC) in the same match:
 •  will receive a second temporary dismissal and then takes no further part 
in the match
 •  may be replaced by a substitute at the end of the second temporary 
dismissal period  if the player’s team has not used its maximum number  
of substitutes (this is because the team has already been ‘punished’ by 
playing without that player for two temporary dismissal periods)

PAGE 25
25
System B – temporary dismissal for some but not all cautions (YCs)*
•  A pre-defined list of cautionable (YC) offences will be punished by a 
temporary dismissal 
•  All other cautionable offences are punished with a caution (YC) 
•  A player who has been temporarily dismissed and then receives a caution 
(YC) continues playing 
•  A player who has received a caution (YC) and then receives a temporary 
dismissal can continue playing after the end of the temporary  
dismissal period
•  A player who receives a second temporary dismissal in the same match will 
serve the temporary dismissal and then takes no further part in the match. 
The player may be replaced by a substitute at the end of the second 
temporary dismissal period  if the player’s team has not used its maximum 
number of substitutes but a player who has also received a non-temporary 
dismissal caution (YC) may not be replaced or substituted
•  A player who receives a second caution (YC) in the same match will be sent 
off and takes no further part in the match and may not be replaced/
substituted
 *Some competitions may find it valuable to use temporary dismissals only for 
cautions (YCs) for offence s relating to ‘inappropriate’ behaviour, e.g. 
• Simulation
• Deliberately delaying the opposing team’s restart of the match 
• Dissent or verbal comments or gestures
•  Stopping or interfering with a promising attack by holding, pulling, pushing  
or handball
• Kicker illegally feinting at a penalty kick
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Notes and modifications

PAGE 26
26
 Following approval at the 131 st AGM of The IFAB held in London on 3 rd March 
2017 the Laws of the Game now permit the use of return substitutes in youth, 
veterans, disability and grassroots football, subject to the approval of the 
competition’s national FA, confederation or FIFA, whichever is appropriate. 
 Reference to return substitutions is found in:
 Law 3 – The Players (Number of substitutions):  
Return substitutions
•  The use of return substitutions is only permitted in youth, veterans, 
disability and  grassroots football, subject to the agreement of the national 
football association, confederation or FIFA.
 A ‘return substitute’ is a player who has already played in the match and has 
been substituted (a substituted player) and later in the match returns to play 
by replacing another player.
 Apart from the dispensation for a substituted player to return to play in the 
match, all other provisions of Law 3 and the Laws of the Game apply to return 
substitutes. In particular, the substitution procedure outlined in Law 3  
must be followed.
Guidelines for 
return substitutes 

PAGE 27
27
Laws of the Game 2017/18   |  All Laws  |  Offences and infringements       


PAGE 28


PAGE 29
29
Laws 
of the Game
2023/24

PAGE 30
Law
1

PAGE 31
31Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 1  |  The Field of Play       
1. Field surface
 The field of play must be a wholly natural or, if competition rules permit,  
a wholly artificial playing surface except where competition rules permit an 
integrated combination of artificial and natural materials (hybrid system).
The colour of artificial surfaces must be green.
 Where artificial surfaces are used in competition matches between 
representative teams of national football associations affiliated to FIFA or 
international club competition matches, the surface must meet the 
requirements of the FIFA Quality Programme for Football Turf, unless special 
dispensation is given by The IFAB.
2. Field markings
 The field of play must be rectangular and marked with continuous lines which 
must not be dangerous; artificial playing surface material may be used for the 
field markings on natural fields if it is not dangerous. These lines belong to the 
areas of which they are boundaries.
 Only the lines indicated in Law 1 are to be marked on the field of play. Where 
artificial surfaces are used, other lines are permitted provided they are a 
different colour and clearly distinguishable from the football lines.
 The two longer boundary lines are touchlines. The two shorter lines are  
goal lines.
 The field of play is divided into two halves by a halfway line, which joins the 
midpoints of the two touchlines.
 The centre mark is at the midpoint of the halfway line. A circle with a radius  
of 9.15 m (10yds) is marked around it.
1
The Field of Play 

PAGE 32
32
min. 45 m (50 yds) / max. 90 m  (100 yds)goal line
corner area
goal area
penalty area
7.32  m (8 yds)
penalty arc
penalty mark
flagpost (optional) corner flagpost (compulsory)
min. 90 m (100 yds) / max. 120 m (130 yds)
radius 
9.15 m
(10  yds)
halfway linecentre mark
centre circle
9.15 m (10 yds)
touchline
11 m
(12 yds)
9.15 m
(10 yds)
16.5 m 
(18 yds)
5.5  m
(6 yds)
16.5 m (18 yds) 5.5  m (6 yds) 9.15 m (10 yds)
optional 
mark
radius 1 m (1 yd)
•  Measurements are from the outside of the lines as the lines are part  
of the area they enclose.
•  The penalty mark is measured from the centre of the mark to the back edge 
of the goal line.

PAGE 33
33
  Marks may be made off the field of play 9.15 m (10 yds) from the corner arc  
at right angles to the goal lines and the touchlines.
 All lines must be of the same width, which must not be more than 12 cm  
(5ins). The goal lines must be of the same width as the goalposts and the 
crossbar.
 A player who makes unauthorised marks on the field of play must be cautioned 
for unsporting behaviour. If the referee notices this being done during  
the match, the player is cautioned when the ball next goes out of play. 
3. Dimensions 
 The touchline must be longer than the goal line.
•  Length (touchline):  
minimum   90 m (100 yds)  
maximum 120 m (130 yds)
•   Length (goal line):  
minimum 45 m (50 yds) 
maximum 90 m (100 yds)
 Competitions may determine the length of the goal line and touchline within  
the above dimensions.
4. Dimensions for international matches
•  Length (touchline):  
minimum 100 m (110 yds)  
maximum 110 m (120 yds)
•   Length (goal line):  
minimum 64 m (70 yds)  
maximum 75 m (80 yds)
 Competitions may determine the length of the goal line and touchline within  
the above dimensions.
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 1  |  The Field of Play       

PAGE 34
34
5. The goal area
 Two lines are drawn at right angles to the goal line, 5.5 m (6 yds) from the 
inside of each goalpost. These lines extend into the field of play for 5.5 m 
(6yds) and are joined by a line drawn parallel with the goal line. The area 
bounded by these lines and the goal line is the goal area.
6. The penalty area
 Two lines are drawn at right angles to the goal line, 16.5 m (18 yds) from the 
inside of each goalpost. These lines extend into the field of play for 16.5 m     
(18  yds) and are joined by a line drawn parallel with the goal line. The area 
bounded by these lines and the goal line is the penalty area.
 Within each penalty area, a penalty mark is made 11 m (12 yds) from the 
midpoint between the goalposts.
 An arc of a circle with a radius of 9.15 m (10 yds) from the centre of each 
penalty mark is drawn outside the penalty area.
7. The corner area
 The corner area is defined by a quarter circle with a radius of 1 m (1 yd) from 
each corner flagpost drawn inside the field of play.
corner area  
radius  1  m (1  yd)
Corner flagpost is compulsory  
Flagpost to be not less than 1.5  m (5  ft) high, 
with a non-pointed top
Lines to be not more  
than 12  cm  (5  ins) wide

PAGE 35
35
8. Flagposts
 A flagpost, at least 1.5 m (5 ft) high, with a non-pointed top and a flag must  
be placed at each corner. 
 Flagposts may be placed at each end of the halfway line, at least 1m (1yd) 
outside the touchline.
9. The technical area
 The technical area relates to matches played in stadiums with a designated 
sitting area for team officials, substitutes and substituted players  as outlined 
below:
•  the technical area should only extend 1  m (1 yd) on either side of the 
designated seated area and up to a distance of 1 m (1 yd) from the touchline 
•  markings should be used to define the area
•  the number of persons permitted to occupy the technical area is defined by 
the competition rules
•  the occupants of the technical area:
 •  are identified before the start of the match in accordance with the 
competition rules
 •   must behave in a responsible manner
 •  must remain within its confines except in special circumstances, e.g.  
a physiotherapist/doctor entering the field of play, with the referee’s 
permission, to assess an injured player
•  only one person at a time is authorised to convey tactical instructions from 
the technical area
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 1  |  The Field of Play       

PAGE 36
36
10. Goals
 A goal must be placed on the centre of each goal line.
 A goal consists of two vertical posts equidistant from the corner flagposts  
and joined at the top by a horizontal crossbar. The goalposts and crossbar must 
be made of approved material and must not be dangerous. The goalposts and 
crossbar of both goals must be the same shape, which must be square, 
rectangular, round, elliptical or a hybrid of these options. 
 It is recommended that all goals used in an official competition organised 
under the auspices of FIFA or confederations meet the requirements of the 
FIFA Quality Programme for Football Goals.
 The distance between the inside of the posts is 7.32 m (8 yds) and the distance 
from the lower edge of the crossbar to the ground is 2.44 m (8 ft). 
 The position of the goalposts in relation to the goal line must be in accordance 
with the graphics.
 The goalposts and the crossbar must be white and have the same width and 
depth, which must not exceed 12 cm (5 ins).
 If the crossbar becomes dis placed or broken, play is stopped until it has been 
repaired or replaced in position. Play is restarted with a dropped ball.  If it 
cannot be repaired the match must be abandoned. A rope or any flexible or 
dangerous material may not replace the crossbar. 
 Nets may be attached to the goals and the ground behind the goal; they must 
be properly supported and must not interfere with the goalkeeper. 
Safety
 Goals (including portable goals) must be firmly secured to the ground.
11. Goal line technology (GLT)  
 GLT systems may be used to verify whether a goal has been scored to support 
the referee’s decision.
 The use of GLT must be stipulated in the competition rules.

PAGE 37
37
37
2.44  m (8  ft)
 The position of the goalposts  
in relation to the goal line must be in 
accordance with the graphics below.
7.32  m
7.32  m
7.32  m
7.32  m
7.32 m (8 yds)

PAGE 38
38
Principles of GLT
 GLT applies solely to the goal line and is only used to determine whether a goal 
has been scored.
 The indication of whether a goal has been scored must be immediate and 
automatically confirmed within one second by the GLT system only to the 
match officials (via the referee’s watch, by vibration and visual signal); it may 
also be sent to the video operation room (VOR).
Requirements and specifications of GLT
 If GLT is used in competition matches, the competition organisers must ensure 
that the system (including any potentially permitted modifications to the goal 
frame or technology in the ball) meets the requirements of the FIFA Quality 
Programme for GLT .
 Where GLT is used, the referee must test the technology’s functionality before 
the match as set out in the Testing Manual. If the technology does not function 
in accordance with the Testing Manual, the referee must not use the GLT 
system and must report this to the appropriate authorities.
12. Commercial advertising
 No form of commercial advertising, whether real or virtual, is permitted on  
the field of play, on the ground within the area enclosed by the goal nets, the 
technical area or the referee review area (RRA) , or on the ground within 1m 
(1yd) of the boundary  lines from the time the teams enter the field of play until 
they have left it at half-time and from the time the teams re-enter the field of 
play until the end of the match. Advertising is not permitted on the goals, nets, 
flagposts or their flags and no extraneous equipment (cameras, microphones, 
etc.) may be attached to these items.
In addition, upright advertising must be at least:
• 1 m (1 yd) from the touchlines
• the same distance from the goal line as the depth of the goal net
• 1 m (1 yd) from the goal net

PAGE 39
39
13. Logos and emblems
 The reproduction, whether real or virtual, of representative logos or emblems 
of FIFA, confederations, national football  associations, competitions , clubs or 
other bodies is forbidden on the field of play, the goal nets and the areas they 
enclose, the goals, and the flagposts during playing time. They are permitted on 
the flags on the flagposts.
14. Video assistant referees (VARs) 
 In matches using VARs there must be a video operation room (VOR) and  
at least one referee review area (RRA).
Video operation room (VOR)
 The VOR is where the video assistant referee (VAR), assistant VAR (AVAR)  
and replay operator (RO) work; it may be in/close to the stadium or at a more 
distant location. Only authorised persons are permitted to enter the VOR or 
communicate with the VAR, AVAR and RO during the match.
 A player, substitute, substituted player or team official  who enters the VOR will 
be sent off .
Referee review area (RRA)
 In matches using VARs there must be at least one RRA where the referee 
undertakes an ‘on-field review’ (OFR). The RRA must be:
• in a visible location outside the field of play
• clearly marked
 A player, substitute, substituted player or team official  who enters the RRA will 
be cautioned. 
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 1  |  The Field of Play       

PAGE 40
Law
2

PAGE 41
41
1. Qualities and measurements
All balls must be:
• spherical
• made of suitable material 
• of a circumference of between 68 cm (27 ins) and 70 cm (28 ins)  
•  between 410 g (14 oz) and 450 g (16 oz) in weight at the start of the match
•  of a pressure equal to 0.6–1.1 atmosphere (600–1,100g/cm 2) at sea level 
(8.5lbs/sq in–15.6 lbs/sq in)
 All balls used in matches played in an official competition organised under the 
auspices of FIFA or confederations must meet the requirements and bear one 
of the marks of the FIFA Quality Programme for Footballs.
 Each mark indicates that the ball has been officially tested and meets the 
specific technical requirements for that mark which are additional to the 
minimum specifications stipulated in Law 2 and must be approved by The 
IFAB. 
 National FA competitions may require the use of balls bearing one of these 
marks.
 In matches played in an official competition organised under the auspices  
of FIFA, confederations or national FAs, no form of commercial advertising is 
permitted on the ball, except for the logo/emblem of the competition, the 
competition organiser and the authorised manufacturer’s trademark. The 
competition regulations may restrict the size and number of such markings.
2
The Ball
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 2  |  The Ball      

PAGE 42
42
2. Replacement of a defective ball
If the ball becomes defective:
• play is stopped and
•  restarted with a dropped ball
 If the ball becomes defective at a kick-off, goal kick, corner kick, free kick, 
penalty kick or throw-in, the restart is retaken.
 If the ball becomes defective during a penalty kick or penalties (penalty 
shoot-out)  as it moves forward and before it touches a player, crossbar or 
goalposts, the penalty kick is retaken.
 The ball may not be changed during the match without the referee’s 
permission.
3. Additional balls
 Additional balls which meet the requirements of Law 2 may be placed around 
the field of play and their use is under the referee’s control.

PAGE 43
43


PAGE 44
Law
3

PAGE 45
45
The Players
1. Number of players
 A match is played by two teams, each with a maximum of eleven players;  
one must be the goalkeeper. A match may not start or continue  if either team 
has fewer than seven players.
 If a team has fewer than seven players because one or more players has 
deliberately left the field of play, the referee is not obliged to stop play and  
the advantage may be played, but the match must not resume after the ball has 
gone out of play if a team does not have the minimum number of seven players.
 If the competition rules state that all players and substitutes must be named 
before kick-off and a team starts a match with fewer than eleven players,  
only the players and substitutes named on the team list may take part in the 
match upon their arrival.
2. Number of substitutions
Official competitions
 The number of substitutes, up to a maximum of five, which may be used in  
any match played in an official competition will be determined by FIFA,  
the confederation or the national football association. For men ’s and women ’s 
competitions involving the 1 st teams of clubs in the top division or senior ‘ A’ 
international teams where competition rules permit a maximum of five 
substitutes to be used, each team:
• has a maximum of three substitution opportunities*
• may additionally make substitutions at half-time
 *Where both teams make a substitution at the same time, this will count as a 
used substitution opportunity for both teams. Multiple substitutions (and 
requests) by a team during the same stoppage in play count as one used 
substitution opportunity.3
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 3  |  The Players

PAGE 46
46
Extra time
•  If a team has not used the maximum number of substitutes and/or 
substitution opportunities, any unused substitutes and substitution 
opportunities may be used in extra time
•  Where competition rules permit teams to use one additional substitute in 
extra time, each team will have one additional substitution opportunity
•  Substitutions may also be made in the period between full-time and the start 
of extra time, and at half-time in extra time – these do not count as used 
substitution opportunities
 The competition rules must state: 
• how many substitutes may be named, from three to a maximum of fifteen
•  whether one additional substitute may be used when a match goes into extra 
time (whether or not the team has already used the full number of permitted 
substitutes)
Other matches
 In senior ‘A’ international team matches, a maximum of fifteen  substitutes may 
be named of which  a maximum of six may be used.
 In all other matches, a greater number of substitutes may be used provided 
that: 
• the teams reach agreement on a maximum number
• the referee is informed before the match
 If the referee is not informed, or if no agreement is reached before the match, 
each team is allowed a maximum of six substitutes.
Return substitutions
 The use of return substitutions is only permitted in youth, veterans, disability 
and grassroots football, subject to the agreement of the national football 
association, confederation or FIFA.
3. Substitution procedure
 The names of the substitutes must be given to the referee before the start of the 
match. Any substitute not named by this time may not take part in the match. 

PAGE 47
47
To replace a player with a substitute, the following must be observed:
• the referee must be informed before any substitution is made
•  the player being substituted:
 •  receives the referee’s permission to leave the field of play, unless already 
off the field, and must leave by the nearest point on the boundary line 
unless the referee indicates that the player may leave directly and 
immediately at the halfway line or another point (e.g. for safety/security 
or injury) 
 •  must go immediately to the technical area or dressing room and takes no 
further part in the match, except where return substitutions are permitted
• if a player who is to be substituted refuses to leave, play continues
The substitute only enters:
• during a stoppage in play
• at the halfway line
• after the player being replaced has left 
• after receiving a signal from the referee
 The substitution is completed when a substitute enters the field of play;  
from that moment, the replaced player becomes a substituted player and  
the substitute becomes a player and can take any restart.
  All substituted players and substitutes are subject to the referee’s authority, 
whether they play or not.
4. Changing the goalkeeper
Any of the players may change places with the goalkeeper if:
• the referee is informed before the change is made
• the change is made during a stoppage in play 
5. Offences  and sanctions
 If a named substitute starts  a match instead of a named player and the  
referee is not informed of this change:
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 3  |  The Players

PAGE 48
48
• the referee allows the named substitute to continue playing
• no disciplinary action may be taken against the named substitute
• the named player can become a named substitute
• the number of substitutions is not reduced
• the referee reports the incident to the appropriate authorities
 If a substitution is made during the half-time interval or before extra time,  
the procedure must be completed before the match restarts. If the referee is 
not informed, the named substitute may continue to play, no disciplinary  
action is taken and the matter is reported to the appropriate authorities.
 If a player changes places with the goalkeeper without the referee’s 
permission, the referee:
• allows play to continue
•  cautions both players when the ball is next out of play but not if the change 
occurred during half-time (including half-time of extra time) or the period 
between the end of the match and the start of extra time and/or penalties 
(penalty shoot-out)
For any other offences:
• the players are cautioned
•  play is restarted with an indirect free kick, from the position of the ball when 
play was stopped
6. Players and substitutes sent off
 A player who is sent off: 
•  before submission of the team list cannot be named on the team list in  
any capacity
•  after being named on the team list and before kick-off may be replaced by a 
named substitute, who cannot be replaced; the number of substitutions the 
team can make is not reduced
•  after the kick-off cannot be replaced
 A named substitute who is sent off before or after the kick-off may not be 
replaced.

PAGE 49
49
7. Extra persons on the field of play
 The coach and other officials named on the team list (with the exception of 
players or substitutes) are team officials. Anyone not named on the team list as  
a player, substitute or team official is an outside agent.
 If a team official, substitute, substituted or sent-off player or outside agent 
enters the field of play, the referee must:
• only stop play if there is interference with play
• have the person removed when play stops
• take appropriate disciplinary action
If play is stopped and the interference was by:
•  a team official, substitute, substituted or sent-off  player, play restarts with a  
direct free kick or penalty kick
• an outside agent, play restarts with a dropped ball
 If a ball is going into the goal and the interference does not prevent a defending 
player playing the ball, the goal is awarded if the ball enters the goal (even if 
contact was made with the ball) unless the interference was by the attacking 
team. 
8. Player outside the field of play
 If a player who requires the referee’s permission to re-enter the field of play 
re-enters without the referee’s permission, the referee must:
•  stop play (not immediately if the player does not interfere with play  
or a match official or if the advantage can be applied)
•  caution the player for entering the field of play without permission
If the referee stops play, it must be restarted:
•  with a direct free kick from the position of the interference
•  with an indirect free kick from the position of the ball when play was 
stopped if there was no interference
 A player who crosses a boundary line as part of a playing movement does  
not commit an offence.
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 3  |  The Players

PAGE 50
50
9. Goal scored with an extra person on the field of play
 If, after a goal is scored, the referee realises, before play restarts, that an extra 
person was on the field of play when the goal was scored , and that person 
interfered with play :
• the referee must disallow the goal if the extra person was:
 •  a player, substitute, substituted player, sent-off player or team official of 
the team that scored the goal; play is restarted with a direct free kick from 
the position of the extra person
 •  an outside agent who interfered with play unless a goal results as outlined 
above in ‘Extra persons on the field of play’; play is restarted with a 
dropped ball
• the referee must allow the goal if the extra person was:
 •  a player, substitute, substituted player, sent-off player or team official of 
the team that conceded the goal
 • an outside agent who did not interfere with play
 In all cases, the referee must have the extra person removed from the field  
of play.
 If, after a goal is scored and play has restarted, the referee realises an extra 
person was on the field of play when the goal was scored, the goal cannot be  
disallowed.  If the extra person is still on the field the referee must:
• stop play
• have the extra person removed
• restart with a dropped ball or free kick as appropriate 
The referee must report the incident to the appropriate authorities.
10. Team captain 
 The team captain has no special status or privileges but has a degree of  
responsibility for the behaviour of the team.

PAGE 51
51


PAGE 52
Law
4

PAGE 53
53Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 4  |  The Players’ Equipment
1. Safety
A player must not use equipment or wear anything that is dangerous.
 All items of jewellery (necklaces, rings, bracelets, earrings, leather bands, 
rubber bands, etc.) are forbidden and must be removed. Using tape to cover 
jewellery is not permitted.
 The players must be inspected before the start of the match and substitutes 
before they enter the field of play. If a player is wearing or using unauthorised/
dangerous equipment or jewellery, the referee must order the player to:
• remove the item
•  leave the field of play at the next stoppage if the player is unable or unwilling  
to comply
 A player who refuses to comply or wears the item again must be cautioned.
2. Compulsory equipment 
The compulsory equipment of a player comprises the following separate items:
• a shirt with sleeves
• shorts
•  socks – tape or any material applied or worn externally  must be the same 
colour as that part of the sock it is applied to or covers
•  shinguards – these must be made of a suitable material to provide reasonable 
protection and covered by the socks
• footwear
Goalkeepers may wear tracksuit bottoms.
4
The Players’ Equipment

PAGE 54
54
 A player whose footwear or shinguard  is lost accidentally must replace it as 
soon as possible and no later than when the ball next goes out of play ;  
if before doing so the player plays the ball and/or scores a goal, the goal is 
awarded. 
3. Colours
•  The two teams must wear colours that distinguish them from each other  
and the match officials 
•  Each goalkeeper must wear colours that are distinguishable from the other 
players and the match officials
•  If the two goalkeepers’ shirts are the same colour and neither has another 
shirt, the referee allows the match to be played
 Undershirts must be:
•       a single colour which is the same colour as the main colour of the shirt sleeve 
or
• a pattern/colours which exactly replicate(s) the shirt sleeve
 Undershorts/tights must be the same colour as the main colour of the shorts or 
the lowest part of the shorts – players of the same team must wear the same 
colour.
4. Other equipment
 Non-dangerous protective equipment, for example headgear, facemasks  
and knee and arm protectors made of soft, lightweight padded material is 
permitted, as are goalkeepers’ caps and sports spectacles.
Head covers 
Where head covers (excluding goalkeepers’ caps) are worn, they must:
•  be black or the same main colour as the shirt (provided that the players of 
the same team wear the same colour)
• be in keeping with the professional appearance of the player’s equipment
• not be attached to the shirt

PAGE 55
55
•  not be dangerous to the player wearing it or any other player (e.g. opening/
closing mechanism around neck)
• not have any part(s) extending out from the surface (protruding elements)
Electronic communication
 Players (including substitutes/substituted and sent-off players) are not 
permitted to wear or use any form of electronic or communication equipment 
(except where EPTS is allowed). The use of any form of electronic 
communication by team officials is permitted where it directly relates to player 
welfare or safety or for tactical/coaching reasons but only small, mobile, 
handheld  equipment (e.g. microphone, headphone, earpiece , mobile phone/
smartphone, smartwatch, tablet, laptop) may be used. A team official who uses 
unauthorised equipment or who behaves in an inappropriate manner as a 
result of the use of electronic or communication equipment will be sent off .
Electronic performance and tracking systems (EPTS) 
 Where wearable technology (WT) as part of electronic performance and 
tracking systems (EPTS) is used in matches played in an official competition 
organised under the auspices of FIFA, confederations or national football 
associations, the competition organiser must ensure that  the technology 
attached to the players’ equipment is not dangerous and  meets the 
requirements for wearable EPTS under the FIFA Quality Programme for EPTS.
  Where EPTS are provided by the match or competition organiser, it is the 
responsibility of that match or competition organiser to ensure that  the 
information and data transmitted from EPTS to the  technical area during 
matches  played in an official competition are reliable and accurate . 
  The FIFA Quality Programme for EPTS  supports  competition organisers with 
the approval process of reliable and accurate electronic performance and 
tracking systems.
5. Slogans, statements, images and advertising
 Equipment must not have any political, religious or personal slogans, statements 
or images. Players must not reveal undergarments that show political, religious, 
personal slogans, statements or images, or advertising other than the 
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 4  |  The Players’ Equipment

PAGE 56
56
manufacturer ’s logo. For any offence the player and/or the team will be 
sanctioned by the competition organiser, national football association  
or by FIFA.
Principles
•  Law 4 applies to all equipment (including clothing) worn by players, 
substitutes and substituted players; its principles also apply to all team 
officials in the technical area
• The following are (usually) permitted:
 •  the player’s number, name, team crest/logo, initiative slogans/emblems 
promoting the game of football, respect and integrity as well as any 
advertising permitted by competition rules or national FA, confederation 
or FIFA regulations
 • the facts of a match: teams, date, competition/event, venue
•  Permitted slogans, statements or images should be confined to the shirt front 
and/or armband
•    In some cases, the slogan, statement or image might only appear on the 
captain’s armband
Interpreting the Law
 When interpreting whether a slogan, statement or image is permissible, note 
should be taken of Law 12 (Fouls and Misconduct), which requires the referee 
to take action against a player who is guilty of:
• using offensive, insulting or abusive language and/or action(s)
• acting  in a provocative, derisory or inflammatory way
 Any slogan, statement or image which falls into any of these categories is  
not permitted. 
 Whilst ‘religious’ and ‘personal’ are relatively easily defined, ‘political’ is  
less clear but slogans, statements or images related to the following are not 
permitted:

PAGE 57
57
•  any person(s), living or dead (unless part of the official competition name)
•  any local, regional, national or international political party/organisation/
group, etc.
•  any local, regional or national government or any of its departments,  
offices or functions
• any organisation which is discriminatory 
•  any organisation whose aims/actions are likely to offend a notable  
number of people
• any specific political act/event
 When commemorating a significant national or international event, the 
sensibilities of the opposing team (including its supporters) and the general 
public should be carefully considered. 
 Competition rules may contain further restrictions/limitations, particularly  
in relation to the size, number and position of permitted slogans, statements 
and images. It is recommended that disputes relating to slogans, statements or 
images be resolved prior to a match/competition taking place.
6. Offences and sanctions
For any offence, play need not be stopped and the player:
• is instructed by the referee to leave the field of play to correct the equipment
• leaves when play stops, unless the equipment has already been corrected
A player who leaves the field of play to correct or change equipment must:
•  have the equipment checked by a match official  before being allowed to 
re-enter
•  only re-enter with the referee’s permission ( which may be given during play )
 A player who enters without permission must be cautioned, and if play is 
stopped to issue the caution, an indirect free kick is awarded from the position 
of the ball when play was stopped, unless there was interference, in which case 
a direct free kick (or penalty kick) is awarded from the position of the 
interference.
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 4  |  The Players’ Equipment

PAGE 58
Law
5

PAGE 59
59Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 5  |  The Referee
1. The authority of the referee
 Each match is controlled by a referee who has full authority to enforce  
the Laws of the Game in connection with the match.
2. Decisions of the referee
 Decisions will be made to the best of the referee ’s ability according to the Laws 
of the Game and the ‘spirit of the game’ and will be based on the opinion of the 
referee, who has the discretion to take appropriate action within the 
framework of the Laws of the Game.
 The decisions of the referee regarding facts connected with play, including 
whether or not a goal is scored and the result of the match, are final. The 
decisions of the referee, and all other match officials, must always be respected.
 The referee may not change a restart decision on realising that it is incorrect or 
on the advice of another match official if play has restarted or the referee has  
signalled the end of the first or second half (including extra time) and left the  
field of play  or abandoned the match. However, if at the end of the half, the 
referee leaves the field of play to go to the referee review area (RRA) or to 
instruct the players to return to the field of play, this does not prevent a 
decision being changed for an incident which occurred before the end of the 
half.
 Except as outlined in Law 12.3 and the VAR protocol, a disciplinary sanction 
may only be issued after play has restarted if another match official had 
identified and attempted to communicate the offence to the referee before play 
restarted; the restart associated with the sanction does not apply.
 If a referee is incapacitated, play may continue under the supervision of the 
other match officials until the ball is next out of play.  
5
The Referee

PAGE 60
60
3. Powers and duties
The referee:
• enforces the Laws of the Game
• controls the match in cooperation with the other match officials
•  acts as timekeeper, keeps a record of the match and provides the appropriate 
authorities with a match report, including information on disciplinary action 
and any other incidents that occurred before, during or after the match
• supervises and/or indicates the restart of play
Advantage
•  allows play to continue when an offence occurs and the non-offending team 
will benefit from the advantage, and penalises the offence if the anticipated 
advantage does not ensue at that time or within a few seconds
Disciplinary action
•  punishes the more serious offence, in terms of sanction, restart, physical 
severity and tactical impact, when more than one offence occurs  
at the same time
•  takes disciplinary action against players guilty of cautionable and 
sending-off offences
•  has the authority to take disciplinary action from entering the field of play 
for the pre-match inspection  until leaving the field of play after the match 
ends (including penalties (penalty shoot-out) ). If, before entering the field of 
play at the start of the match, a player commits a sending-off offence, the 
referee has the authority to prevent the player taking part in the match  
(see Law 3.6); the referee will report any other misconduct
•  has the power to show yellow or red cards and, where competition rules 
permit, temporarily dismiss a player, from entering the field of play at the 
start of the match until after the match has ended, including during the 
half-time interval, extra time and penalties (penalty shoot-out)
•  takes action against team officials who fail to act in a responsible manner 
and warns or shows a yellow card for a caution or a red card for a 
sending-off from the field of play and its immediate surrounds, including the 
technical area; if the offender cannot be identified, the senior coach present 

PAGE 61
61
in the technical area will receive the sanction.  A medical team official who 
commits a sending-off offence may remain if the team has no other medical 
person available, and act if a player needs medical attention
•  acts on the advice of other match officials regarding incidents that the 
referee has not seen
Injuries
•  allows play to continue until the ball is out of play if a player is only  
slightly injured
•  stops play if a player is seriously injured and ensures that the player is 
removed from the field of play. An injured player may not be treated on the 
field of play and may only re-enter after play has restarted; if the ball is in 
play, re-entry must be from the touchline but if the ball is out of play, it may 
be from any boundary line. Exceptions to the requirement to leave the field 
of play are only when:
 • a goalkeeper is injured
 • a goalkeeper and an outfield player have collided and need attention
 • players from the same team have collided and need attention
 • a severe injury has occurred
 •  a player is injured as the result of a physical offence for which  
the opponent is cautioned or sent off (e.g. reckless or serious foul  
challenge), if the assessment/treatment is completed quickly
 • a penalty kick has been awarded and the injured player will be the kicker
•  ensures that any player bleeding leaves the field of play. The player may  
only re-enter on receiving a signal from the referee, who must be satisfied 
that the bleeding has stopped and there is no blood on the equipment 
•  if the referee has authorised the doctors and/or stretcher bearers to enter 
the field of play, the player must leave on a stretcher or on foot. A player who 
does not comply must be cautioned for unsporting behaviour 
•  if the referee has decided to caution or send off a player who is injured and 
has to leave the field of play for treatment, the card must be shown before 
the player leaves 
•  if play has not been stopped for another reason, or if an injury suffered by  
a player is not the result of an offence, play is restarted with a dropped ball 
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 5  |  The Referee

PAGE 62
62
Outside interference 
•  stops, suspends or abandons the match for any offences or because of 
outside interference e.g. if:
 • the floodlights are inadequate
 •  an object thrown by a spectator hits a match official, a player or team 
official, the referee may allow the match to continue, or stop, suspend or 
abandon it depending on the severity of the incident
 •  a spectator blows a whistle which interferes with play – play is stopped 
and restarted with a dropped ball 
 •  an extra ball, other object or animal enters the field of play during the 
match, the referee must:
 –  stop play (and restart with a dropped ball) only if it interferes with play 
– unless the ball is going into the goal and the interference does not 
prevent a defending player playing the ball; the goal is awarded if the 
ball enters the goal (even if contact was made with the ball) unless the 
interference was by the attacking team
 –  allow play to continue if it does not interfere with play and have it 
removed at the earliest possible opportunity
• allows no unauthorised persons to enter the field of play
4. Video assistant referee (VAR) 
 The use of video assistant referees (VARs) is only permitted where the match/
competition organiser has fulfilled all Implementation Assistance and Approval 
Programme (IAAP)  requirements as set out in FIFA’s IAAP documents,  and has 
received written permission from FIFA.
 The referee may be assisted by a video assistant referee (VAR) only in the event 
of a ‘clear and obvious error’ or ‘serious missed incident’ in relation to:
• goal/no goal
• penalty/no penalty
• direct red card (not second caution)
•  mistaken identity when the referee cautions or sends off the wrong player of 
the offending team

PAGE 63
63
 The assistance from the video assistant referee (VAR) will relate to using 
replay(s) of the incident. The referee will make the final decision which may be 
based solely on the information from the VAR and/or the referee reviewing the 
replay footage directly ( ‘on-field review ’).
 Except for a ‘serious missed incident’ , the referee (and where relevant other  
‘on-field’ match officials) must always make a decision (including a decision 
not to penalise a potential offence); this decision does not change unless it is a 
‘clear and obvious error’ .
 Reviews after play has restarted
 If play has stopped and restarted, the referee may only undertake a ‘review’, 
and take the appropriate disciplinary sanction, for mistaken identity or for a 
potential sending-off offence relating to violent conduct, spitting, biting or 
extremely offensive, insulting and/or abusive action(s).
5. Referee’s equipment
Compulsory equipment
Referees must have the following equipment:
• Whistle(s)
• Watch(es)
• Red and yellow cards
• Notebook (or other means of keeping a record of the match)
Other equipment
Referees may be permitted to use:
•  Equipment for communicating with other match officials – buzzer/beep  
flags, headsets etc.
• EPTS or other fitness monitoring equipment
 Referees and other ‘on-field ’ match officials are prohibited from wearing 
jewellery or any other electronic equipment,  including cameras.
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 5  |  The Referee

PAGE 64
64
6. Referee signals
 Refer to graphics for approved referee signals.
Indirect free kick
FREE KICK
FREE KICK
CORNER KICK GOAL KICK
OFFSIDE
PENALTY KICK
Penalty kick
Direct free kick

PAGE 65
65
Advantage  (1)
FREE KICK
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 5  |  The Referee
Advantage  (2)
FREE KICK
Corner kick Goal kick
CORNER KICK GOAL KICK
OFFSIDE
PENALTY KICKCORNER KICK GOAL KICK
OFFSIDE
PENALTY KICK

PAGE 66
66
Red and yellow card
CORNER KICK GOAL KICK
OFFSIDE
PENALTY KICK
• Check – /f_inger to ear, other hand/arm extended
Review – TV Signal
Check: finger to ear, 
other hand/arm extended Review: ‘TV signal’ 
• Check – /f_inger to ear, other hand/arm extended
Review – TV Signal

PAGE 67
67
7. Liability of match officials
A referee or other match official is not held liable for:
• any kind of injury suffered by a player, official or spectator
• any damage to property of any kind
•  any other loss suffered by any individual, club, company, association or other 
body, which is due or which may be due to any decision taken under the 
terms of the Laws of the Game or in respect of the normal procedures 
required to hold, play and control a match
Such decisions may include a decision:
•  that the condition of the field of play or its surrounds or that the weather 
conditions are such as to allow or not to allow a match to take place
• to abandon a match for whatever reason
• as to the suitability of the field equipment and ball used during a match
•  to stop or not to stop a match due to spectator interference or any problem 
in spectator areas
•  to stop or not to stop play to allow an injured player to be removed from the 
field of play for treatment
•  to require an injured player to be removed from the field of play for 
treatment
• to allow or not to allow a player to wear certain clothing or equipment 
•  where the referee has the authority, to allow or not to allow any persons 
(including team or stadium officials, security officers, photographers or 
other media representatives) to be present in the vicinity of the field of play
•  any other decision taken in accordance with the Laws of the Game or in 
conformity with their duties under the terms of FIFA, confederation, national 
football association or competition rules or regulations under which the 
match is played
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 5  |  The Referee

PAGE 68
Law
6

PAGE 69
69Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 6  |  The Other Match Officials
 Other match officials (two assistant referees, a fourth official, two additional 
assistant referees, a reserve assistant referee, a video assistant referee (VAR) 
and at least one assistant VAR (AVAR)) may be appointed to matches.  They will 
assist the referee in controlling the match in accordance with the Laws of the 
Game but the final decision will always be taken by the referee.
 The referee, assistant referees, fourth official, additional assistant referees and 
reserve assistant referee are the ‘on-field’ match officials.
 The VAR and AVAR are the ‘video’ match officials (VMOs)  and assist the referee 
in accordance with the Laws of the Game and the VAR protocol .
 The match officials operate under the direction of the referee.  In the event  
of undue interference or improper conduct, the referee will relieve them of 
their duties and make a report to the appropriate authorities.
 The other  ‘on-field’ match officials assist the referee with offences when they 
have a clearer view than the referee and they must submit a report to the 
appropriate authorities on any serious misconduct or other incident that 
occurred out of the view of the referee and the other match officials. They must 
advise the referee and other match officials of any report being made.
 The ‘on-field’ match officials assist the referee with inspecting the field of play,  
the balls and players’ equipment (including if problems have been resolved)  
and maintaining records of time, goals, misconduct etc.
 Competition rules must state clearly who replaces a match official who is  
unable to start or continue and any associated changes. In particular, it must  
be clear whether, if the referee is unable to start or continue, the fourth official 
or the senior assistant referee or senior additional assistant referee takes over.
6
 
Match Officials
The Other

PAGE 70
70
1. Assistant referees
 They indicate when:
•  the whole of the ball leaves the field of play and which team is entitled  
to a corner kick, goal kick or throw-in
• a player in an offside position may be penalised
• a substitution is requested
•  at penalty kicks, the goalkeeper moves off the goal line before the ball is 
kicked and if the ball crosses the line; if additional assistant referees have 
been appointed, the assistant referee takes a position in line with the penalty  
mark
 The assistant referee’s assistance also includes monitoring the substitution 
procedure.
 The assistant referee may enter the field of play to help control the 9.15m  
(10 yards) distance.
2. Fourth official
The fourth official’s assistance also includes:
• supervising the substitution procedure
• checking a player’s/substitute’s equipment
• the re-entry of a player following a signal/approval from the referee
• supervising the replacement balls
•  indicating the minimum amount of additional time the referee intends  
to play at the end of each half (including extra time)
•  informing the referee of irresponsible behaviour by any technical area 
occupant 

PAGE 71
71
3. Additional assistant referees
The additional assistant referees may indicate:
•  when the whole of the ball passes over the goal line, including when  
a goal is scored
• which team is entitled to a corner kick or goal kick
•  whether, at penalty kicks, the goalkeeper moves off the goal line before  
the ball is kicked and if the ball crosses the line
4.  Reserve assistant referee
 A reserve assistant referee may replace an assistant referee , fourth official or 
additional assistant referee  who is unable to continue , and may also assist the 
referee in the same way as the other ‘on-field’ match officials .
5. Video match officials 
 A video assistant referee (VAR) is a match official who may assist the referee to 
make a decision using replay footage only for a ‘clear and obvious error’  or 
‘serious missed  incident’ relating  to a goal/no  goal, penalty/no  penalty, direct 
red card (not a second  caution)  or a case of mistaken  identity  when the referee 
cautions  or sends off the wrong player of the offending  team.
 An assistant video assistant referee (AVAR) is a match official who helps the 
VAR primarily by:
•  watching the television footage while the VAR is busy with a ‘check’ or  
a ‘review’
•  keeping a record of VAR-related incidents and any communication or 
technology problems
•  assisting the VAR’s communication with the referee, especially 
communicating with the referee when the VAR is undertaking a ‘check’/ 
‘review’, e.g. to tell the referee to ‘stop play’ or ‘delay the restart’ etc.
•  recording the time ‘lost’ when play is delayed for a ‘check’ or a ‘review’ 
•  communicating information about a VAR-related decision to relevant parties
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 6  |  The Other Match Officials

PAGE 72
72
Free kick  for attacking team
Substitution
Free kick  for defending team
FREE KICK FREE KICK
CORNER KICK GOAL KICK
OFFSIDE
PENALTY KICK1
2 2
1
6.  Assistant referee signals
 Refer to graphics for approved  
assistant referee signals.

PAGE 73
73
CORNER KICK GOAL KICK
OFFSIDE
PENALTY KICK
FREE KICK
Corner kick Goal kick
Throw-in  for defending teamThrow-in for attacking team
FREE KICK
FREE KICK
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 6  |  The Other Match Officials

PAGE 74
74
CORNER KICK GOAL KICK
OFFSIDE
PENALTY KICKCORNER KICK GOAL KICK
OFFSIDE
PENALTY KICK
FREE KICKFREE KICK
Offside in the 
middle of the field
Offside
Offside on the 
near side of the field
Offside on the 
far side of the field
2c2b
1 2a

PAGE 75
75
Goal 
(unless the ball has very clearly 
passed over the goal line)
7.  Additional assistant referee signals
75

PAGE 76
Law
7

PAGE 77
77Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 7  |  The Duration of the Match
1. Periods of play
 A match lasts for two equal halves of 45 minutes, which may only be reduced  
if agreed between the referee and the two teams before the start of the match 
and if in accordance with competition rules.
2. Half-time interval
 Players are entitled to an interval at half-time, not exceeding 15 minutes;  
a short drinks break (which should not exceed one minute)  is permitted at the 
interval of half-time in extra time. Competition rules must state the duration of 
the half-time interval and it may be altered only with the referee’s permission.
3. Allowance for time lost
 Allowance is made by the referee in each half for all playing time lost in that 
half through:
• substitutions
• assessment and/or removal of injured players
• wasting time
• disciplinary sanctions
•  medical stoppages permitted by competition rules, e.g. ‘drinks’ breaks 
(which should not exceed one minute) and ‘cooling’ breaks (ninety seconds 
to three minutes)
• delays relating to VAR ‘checks ’ and ‘reviews’
• goal celebrations  
•  any other cause, including any significant delay to a restart  
(e.g. due to interference by an outside agent )
 
7
The Duration of  
the Match

PAGE 78
78
 The fourth official indicates the minimum additional time decided by the 
referee at the end of the final minute of each half. The additional time may be 
increased by the referee but not reduced.
 The referee must not compensate for a timekeeping error during the first half 
by changing the length of the second half.
4. Penalty kick
 If a penalty kick has to be taken or retaken, the half is extended until the 
penalty kick is completed.
5. Abandoned match
 An abandoned match is replayed unless the competition rules or organisers 
determine otherwise.

PAGE 79
79


PAGE 80
Law
8

PAGE 81
81Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 8  |  The Start and Restart of Play
 A kick-off starts both halves of a match, both halves of extra time and restarts 
play after a goal has been scored. Free kicks (direct or indirect), penalty kicks,  
throw-ins, goal kicks and corner kicks are other restarts (see Laws 1 3–17).   
A dropped ball is the restart when the referee stops play and the Law does not 
require one of the above restarts.
 If an offence occurs when the ball is not in play, this does not change how  
play is restarted.
1. Kick-off
Procedure
•  the referee tosses a coin and the team that wins the toss decides which goal 
to attack in the first half or to take the kick-off
•  depending on the above, their opponents take the kick-off or decide which 
goal to attack in the first half
•  the team that decided which goal to attack in the first half takes the kick-off 
to start the second half
• for the second half, the teams change ends and attack the opposite goals
• after a team scores a goal, the kick-off is taken by their opponents
For every kick-off:
•  all players, except the player taking the kick-off, must be in their own half  
of the field of play
•  the opponents of the team taking the kick-off must be at least 9.15 m  
(10 yds) from the ball until it is in play
• the ball must be stationary on the centre mark
• the referee gives a signal
• the ball is in play when it is kicked and clearly moves
8
The Start and  
Restart of Play

PAGE 82
82
•  a goal may be scored directly against the opponents  from the kick-off; if the 
ball directly enters the kicker’s goal, a corner kick is awarded to the opponents
Offences and sanctions
 If the player taking the kick-off touches the ball again before it has touched 
another player, an indirect free kick, or for a handball offence, a direct free kick, 
is awarded.
 In the event of any other kick-off procedure offence, the kick-off is retaken.
2. Dropped ball
Procedure
•  The ball is dropped for the defending team goalkeeper in their penalty area 
if, when play was stopped:
 • the ball was in the penalty area or
 • the last touch of the ball was in the penalty area  
•  In all other cases, the referee drops the ball for one player of the team that 
last touched the ball at the position where it last touched a player, an outside 
agent or, as outlined in Law 9.1, a match official
•  All other players (of both teams) must remain at least 4 m (4.5 yds) from the 
ball until it is in play
The ball is in play when it touches the ground.
Offences and sanctions
The ball is dropped again if it:
• touches a player before it touches the ground
• leaves the field of play after it touches the ground, without touching a player
 If a dropped ball enters the goal without touching at least two players,  play is 
restarted with: 
• a goal kick if it enters the opponents’ goal
• a corner kick if it enters the team’s goal

PAGE 83
83


PAGE 84
Law
9

PAGE 85
85Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 9  |  The Ball in and out of Play
1. Ball out of play
The ball is out of play when:
•  it has wholly passed over the goal line or touchline on the ground or  
in the air
• play has been stopped by the referee
• it touches a match official, remains on the field of play and:
 • a team starts a promising attack or 
 • the ball goes directly into the goal or
 • the team in possession of the ball changes 
In all these cases, play is restarted with a dropped ball.
2. Ball in play
 The ball is in play at all other times when it touches a match official and when 
it rebounds off a goalpost, crossbar or corner flagpost and remains on the field 
of play.
9
The Ball in and
out of Play

PAGE 86
Law
10

PAGE 87
87Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 10  |  Determining the Outcome of a Match
Determining the 
Outcome of a Match
1. Goal scored
 A goal is scored when the whole of the ball passes over the goal line, between 
the goalposts and under the crossbar, provided that no offence has been 
committed by the team scoring the goal.
 If the goalkeeper throws the ball directly into the opponents’ goal, a goal kick is 
awarded.
 If a referee signals a goal before the ball has passed wholly over the goal line, 
play is restarted with a dropped ball.
2. Winning team
 The team scoring the greater number of goals is the winner. If both teams score 
no goals or an equal number of goals, the match is drawn.
 When competition rules require a winning team after a drawn match or 
home-and-away tie, the only permitted procedures to determine the winning 
team are:
• away goals rule
• two equal periods of extra time not exceeding 15 minutes each
• penalties (penalty shoot-out)
A combination of the above procedures may be used.
3. Penalties (penalty shoot-out)
 Penalties (penalty shoot-out)  are taken after the match has ended and unless 
otherwise stated, the relevant Laws of the Game apply. A player who has been 
sent off during the match is not permitted to take part; warnings and cautions 
issued to players and team officials during the match are not carried forward 
into penalties (penalty shoot-out) .10

PAGE 88
88
No goal
Goal
goal  
line
No goal Goal
goal  
line
88

PAGE 89
89
Procedure
Before penalties (penalty shoot-out)  start
•  Unless there are other considerations (e.g. ground conditions, safety etc.),  
the referee tosses a coin to decide  the goal at which the kicks will be taken, 
which may only be changed for safety reasons  or if the goal or playing 
surface becomes unusable
•  The referee tosses a coin again, and the team that wins the toss decides 
whether to take the first or second kick
•  With the exception of a substitute for  a goalkeeper who is unable to continue, 
only players who are on the field of play or are temporarily off the field of 
play (injury, adjusting equipment etc.)  at the end of the match are eligible to 
take kicks
•  Each team is responsible for selecting from the eligible players the order in 
which they will take the kicks. The referee is not informed of the order
•  If at the end of the match and before or during the kicks  one team has a 
greater number of players than its opponents, it must reduce its numbers to 
the same number as its opponents and the referee must be informed  of the 
name and number of each player excluded. Any excluded player is not eligible 
to take part in the kicks (except as outlined below)
•  A goalkeeper who is unable to continue before or during the kicks may be 
replaced by a player excluded to equalise the number of players or, if their 
team has not used its maximum permitted number of substitutes, a named 
substitute, but the replaced goalkeeper takes no further part and may not 
take a kick
•  If the goalkeeper has already taken a kick, the replacement may not take a 
kick until the next round of kicks
During penalties (penalty shoot-out)
•  Only eligible players and match officials are permitted to remain on the field 
of play
•  All eligible players, except the player taking the kick and the two 
goalkeepers, must remain within the centre circle
•  The goalkeeper of the kicker must remain on the field of play, outside the 
penalty area, on the goal line where it meets the penalty area boundary line
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 10  |  Determining the Outcome of a Match

PAGE 90
90
•  An eligible player may change places with the goalkeeper
•  The kick is completed when the ball stops moving, goes out of play or the 
referee stops play for any offence; the kicker may not play the ball a second time 
• The referee keeps a record of the kicks
•  If the goalkeeper commits an offence and, as a result, the kick is retaken,  
the goalkeeper is warned for the first offence and cautioned for any 
subsequent offence(s)
•  If the kicker is penalised for an offence committed after the referee has 
signalled for the kick to be taken, that kick is recorded as missed and the 
kicker is cautioned
•  If both the goalkeeper and the kicker commit an offence at the same time,  
the kick is recorded as missed and the kicker is cautioned
Subject to the conditions explained below, both teams take five kicks
• The kicks are taken alternately by the teams
•  Each kick is taken by a different player, and all eligible players must take a 
kick before any player can take a second kick
•  If,beforebothteamshavetakenfivekicks,onehasscoredmoregoalsthanthe
othercouldscore,evenifitweretocompleteitsfivekicks,nomorekicksaretaken
•  If, after both teams have taken five kicks, the scores are level, kicks continue 
until one team has scored a goal more than the other from the same number 
of kicks
•  The above principle continues for any subsequent sequence of kicks but a  
team may change the order of kickers
•  Penalties (penalty shoot-out)  must not be delayed for a player who leaves 
the field of play. The player’s kick will be forfeited (not scored) if the player 
does not return in time to take a kick
Substitutions and sendings-off during penalties (penalty shoot-out)
•  Aplayer ,substitute,substitutedplayerorteamofficialmaybecautionedorsentoff
• A goalkeeper who is sent off must be replaced by an eligible player
•  A player other than the goalkeeper who is unable to continue may not  
be replaced
•  The referee must not abandon the match if a team is reduced to fewer than 
seven players

PAGE 91
91
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 10  |  Determining the Outcome of a Match


PAGE 92
Law
11

PAGE 93
93Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 11  |  Offside
1. Offside position
It is not an offence to be in an offside position.
A player is in an offside position if:
•  any part of the head, body or feet is in the opponents’ half ( excluding the  
halfway line ) and
•  any part of the head, body or feet is nearer to the opponents’ goal line than 
both the ball and the second-last opponent
 The hands and  arms of all players, including the goalkeepers,  are not 
considered. For the purposes of determining offside, the upper boundary of the 
arm is in line with the bottom of the armpit. 
A player is not in an offside position if level with the:
• second-last opponent or
• last two opponents
2. Offside offence
 A player in an offside position at the moment the ball is played or touched*   
by a team-mate is only penalised on becoming  involved in active play by:
•  interfering with play by playing or touching a ball passed or touched by  
a team-mate or
• interfering with an opponent by:
 •  preventing an opponent from playing or being able to play the ball by 
clearly obstructing the opponent’s line of vision or 
 • challenging an opponent for the ball or
 *The first point of contact of the ‘play’ or ‘touch’ of the ball should be used.11
Offside

PAGE 94
94
 •  clearly attempting to play a ball which is close when  this action impacts  
on an opponent or 
 •  making an obvious action which clearly impacts on the ability of an 
opponent to play the ball 
or
•  gaining an advantage by playing the ball or interfering with an opponent  
when it has:
 •  rebounded or been deflected off the goalpost, crossbar, match official or  
an opponent
 • been deliberately saved by any opponent
 A player in an offside position receiving the ball from an opponent who 
deliberately played* the ball, including by deliberate handball, is not 
considered to have gained an advantage, unless it was a deliberate save by any 
opponent.
 *‘Deliberate play’ (excluding deliberate handball) is when a player has control 
of the ball with the possibility of:
• passing the ball to a team-mate;
• gaining possession of the ball; or
• clearing the ball (e.g. by kicking or heading it)
 If the pass, attempt to gain possession or clearance by the player in control of 
the ball is inaccurate or unsuccessful, this does not negate the fact that the 
player ‘deliberately played’ the ball.
 The following criteria should be used, as appropriate, as indicators that a 
player was in control of the ball and, as a result, can be considered to have 
‘deliberately played’ the ball:
• The ball travelled from distance and the player had a clear view of it
• The ball was not moving quickly
• The direction of the ball was not unexpected
•  The player had time to coordinate their body movement, i.e. it was not a case 

PAGE 95
95
of instinctive stretching or jumping, or a movement that achieved limited 
contact/control
• A ball moving on the ground is easier to play than a ball in the air
 A ‘save’ is when a player stops, or attempts to stop, a ball which is going into or 
very close to the goal with any part of the body except the hands/arms (unless 
the goalkeeper within the penalty area).
In situations where:
•  a player moving from, or standing in, an offside position is in the way of an 
opponent and interferes with the movement of the opponent towards the ball, 
this is an offside offence if it impacts on the ability of the opponent to play or 
challenge for the ball; if the player moves into the way of an opponent and 
impedes the opponent’s progress (e.g. blocks the opponent), the offence 
should be penalised under Law 12
•  a player in an offside position is moving towards the ball with the intention of 
playing the ball and is fouled before playing or attempting to play the ball,  
or challenging an opponent for the ball, the foul is penalised as it has occurred 
before the offside offence
•  an offence is committed against a player in an offside position who is already 
playing or attempting to play the ball, or challenging an opponent for the ball, 
the offside offence is penalised as it has occurred before the foul challenge
3. No offence
There is no offside offence if a player receives the ball directly from:
• a goal kick
• a throw-in
• a corner kick
4. Offences and sanctions
 If an offside offence occurs, the referee awards an indirect free kick where the  
offence occurred, including if it is in the player’s own half of the field of play.
 A defending player who leaves the field of play without the referee’s 
permission will be considered to be on the goal line or touchline for the 
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 11  |  Offside

PAGE 96
96
purposes of offside until the next stoppage in play or until the defending team  
has played the ball towards the halfway line and it is outside its penalty area.  If 
the player left the field of play deliberately, the player must be cautioned when 
the ball is next out of play.
 An attacking player may step or stay off the field of play not to be involved in 
active play. If the player re-enters from the goal line and becomes involved in 
play before the next stoppage in play or the defending team has played the  
ball towards the halfway line and it is outside its penalty area, the player  
will be considered to be positioned on the goal line for the purposes of offside.  
A player who deliberately leaves the field of play and re-enters without the 
referee’s permission and is not penalised for offside and gains an advantage 
must be cautioned.
 If an attacking player remains stationary between the goalposts and inside  
the goal as the ball enters the goal, a goal must be awarded unless the player  
commits an offside offence or a Law 12 offence, in which case  play is restarted 
with an indirect or direct free kick.

PAGE 97
97


PAGE 98
Law
12

PAGE 99
99
12
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 12  |  Fouls and Misconduct
 Direct and indirect free kicks and penalty kicks can only be awarded for  
offences committed when the ball is in play.
1. Direct free kick
 A direct free kick is awarded if a player commits any of the following  
offences against an opponent in a manner considered by the referee to be 
careless, reckless or using excessive force:
• charges
• jumps at
• kicks or attempts to kick
• pushes
• strikes or attempts to strike (including head-butt)
• tackles or challenges
• trips or attempts to trip
 If an offence involves contact, it is penalised by a direct free kick.  
•  Careless is when a player shows a lack of attention or consideration when 
making a challenge or acts without precaution. No disciplinary sanction  
is needed
•  Reckless is when a player acts with disregard  to the danger to,  
or consequences for, an opponent and must be cautioned
•  Using excessive force is when a player exceeds  the necessary use of force 
and/or endangers the safety of an opponent and must be sent off
 A direct free kick is awarded if a player commits any of the following 
offences:
•  a handball offence (except for the goalkeeper within their penalty area)
Fouls and Misconduct

PAGE 100
100
• holds an opponent
• impedes an opponent with contact
• bites or  spits at someone  on the team lists or a match official
•  throws an object at the ball, an opponent or a match official, or makes 
contact with the ball with a held object
See also offences in Law 3.
Handling the ball
 For the purposes of determining handball offences, the upper boundary of 
the arm is in line with the bottom of the armpit. Not every touch of a 
player’s hand/arm with the ball is an offence.
It is an offence if a player: 
•  deliberately touches the ball with their hand/arm, for example moving the 
hand/arm towards the ball
•  touches the ball with their hand/arm when it has made their body 
unnaturally bigger. A player is considered to have made their body 
unnaturally bigger when the position of their hand/arm is not a consequence 
of, or justifiable by, the player’s body movement for that specific situation. By 
having their hand/arm in such a position, the player takes a risk of their 
hand/arm being hit by the ball and being penalised
• scores in the opponents’ goal: 
 •  directly from their hand/arm, even if accidental, including by the 
goalkeeper
 •  immediately after the ball has touched their hand/arm, even if accidental
 The goalkeeper has the same restrictions on handling the ball as any other 
player outside the penalty area.  If the goalkeeper handles the ball inside their 
penalty area when not permitted to do so, an indirect free kick is awarded but 
there is no disciplinary sanction. However, if the offence is playing the ball a 
second time (with or without the hand/arm) after a restart before it touches 
another player, the goalkeeper must be sanctioned if the offence stops a 
promising attack or denies an opponent or the opposing team a goal or an 
obvious goal-scoring opportunity.
11
No handball
Handball
1111
No handball
Handball
Handball

PAGE 101
101
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 12  |  Fouls and Misconduct
11
No handball
Handball
1111
No handball
Handball
Handball
101

PAGE 102
102
2. Indirect free kick
An indirect free kick is awarded if a player:
• plays in a dangerous manner
• impedes the progress of an opponent without any contact being made
•  is guilty of dissent, using offensive, insulting or abusive language and/or 
action(s) or other verbal offences
•  prevents the goalkeeper from releasing the ball from the hands or kicks 
or attempts to kick the ball when the goalkeeper is in the process of 
releasing it 
•  initiates a deliberate trick for the ball to be passed (including from a free 
kick or goal kick) to the goalkeeper with the head, chest, knee etc. to 
circumvent the Law, whether or not the goalkeeper touches the ball with 
the hands; the goalkeeper is penalised if responsible for initiating the 
deliberate trick
•  commits any other offence, not mentioned in the Laws, for which play is 
stopped to caution or send off a player
 An indirect free kick is awarded if a goalkeeper, inside their penalty area, 
commits any of the following offences:
•  controls the ball with the hand/arm for more than six seconds before releasing 
it
•  touches the ball with the hand/arm after releasing it and before it has touched 
another player
•  touches the ball with the hand/arm, unless the goalkeeper has clearly kicked 
or attempted to kick the ball to release it into play, after:
 • it has been deliberately kicked to the goalkeeper by a team-mate
 • receiving it directly from a throw-in taken by a team-mate 
A goalkeeper is considered to be in control of the ball with the hand(s) when:
•  the ball is between the hands or between the hand and any surface  
(e.g. ground, own body) or by touching it with any part of the hands  
or arms, except if the ball rebounds from  the goalkeeper or the goalkeeper 
has made a save

PAGE 103
103
• holding the ball in the outstretched open hand
• bouncing it on the ground or throwing it in the air
 A goalkeeper cannot be challenged by an opponent when in control of  
the ball with the hand(s).
Playing in a dangerous manner
 Playing in a dangerous manner is any action that, while trying to play the  
ball, threatens injury to someone (including the player themself) and includes 
preventing a nearby opponent from playing the ball for fear of injury.
 A scissors or bicycle kick is permissible provided that it is not dangerous to  
an opponent.
Impeding the progress of an opponent without contact
 Impeding the progress of an opponent means moving into the opponent’s path 
to obstruct, block, slow down or force a change of direction when the ball is not 
within playing distance of either player.
 All players have a right to their position on the field of play; being in the way  
of an opponent is not the same as moving into the way of an opponent.
 A player may shield the ball by taking a position between an opponent and the 
ball if the ball is within playing distance and the opponent is not held off with 
the arms or body. If the ball is within playing distance, the player may be fairly 
charged by an opponent.
3. Disciplinary action
 The referee has the authority to take disciplinary action from entering the field 
of play for the pre-match inspection  until leaving the field of play after the 
match ends (including penalties (penalty shoot-out) ).
 If, before entering the field of play at the start of the match, a player or team 
official commits a sending-off offence, the referee has the authority to prevent 
the player or team official taking part in the match (see Law 3.6); the referee 
will report any other misconduct.
 A player or team official who commits a cautionable or sending-off offence, 
either on or off the field of play, is disciplined according to the offence.
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 12  |  Fouls and Misconduct

PAGE 104
104
 The yellow card communicates a caution and the red card communicates a 
sending-off.
 Only a player, substitute, substituted player or team official may be shown the 
red or yellow card.
Players, substitutes and substituted players  
Delaying the restart of play to show a card  
 Once the referee has decided to caution or send off a player, play must not be 
restarted until the sanction has been administered, unless the non-offending 
team takes a quick free kick, has a clear goal-scoring opportunity and the 
referee has not started the disciplinary sanction procedure. The sanction is 
administered at the next stoppage; if the offence was denying the opposing 
team an obvious goal-scoring opportunity, the player is cautioned; if the offence 
interfered with or stopped a promising attack, the player is not cautioned.
Advantage
 If the referee plays the advantage for an offence for which a caution/
sending-off would have been issued had play been stopped, this caution/
sending-off must be issued when the ball is next out of play. However, if the 
offence was denying the opposing team an obvious goal-scoring opportunity, 
the player is cautioned for unsporting behaviour; if the offence was interfering 
with or stopping a promising attack, the player is not cautioned.
 Advantage should not be applied in situations involving serious foul play, 
violent conduct or a second cautionable offence unless there is a clear  
opportunity to score a goal. The referee must send off the player when the ball  
is next out of play, but if the player plays the ball or challenges/interferes with  
an opponent, the referee will stop play, send off the player and restart with an  
indirect free kick, unless the player committed a more serious offence.
 If a defender starts holding an attacker outside the penalty area and continues 
holding inside the penalty area, the referee must award a penalty kick.

PAGE 105
105
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 12  |  Fouls and Misconduct
Cautionable offences
A player is cautioned if guilty of:
• delaying the restart of play
• dissent by word or action
•  entering, re-entering or deliberately leaving the field of play without the 
referee’s permission
•  failing to respect the required distance when play is restarted with a 
dropped ball, corner kick, free kick or throw-in
•  persistent offences (no specific number or pattern of offences constitutes 
‘persistent ’)
• unsporting behaviour
• entering the referee review area (RRA) 
• excessively using the ‘review’ (TV screen) signal
A substitute or substituted player is cautioned if guilty of:
• delaying the restart of play
• dissent by word or action
• entering or re-entering the field of play without the referee’s permission
• unsporting behaviour
• entering the referee review area (RRA) 
• excessively using the ‘review’ (TV screen) signal
 Where two separate cautionable offences are committed (even in close 
proximity), they should result in two cautions, for example if a player enters 
the field of play without the required permission and commits a reckless tackle 
or stops a promising attack with a foul/handball, etc.
Cautions for unsporting behaviour
 There are different circumstances when a player must be cautioned for 
unsporting behaviour, including if a player:
•  attempts to deceive the referee, e.g. by feigning injury or pretending to have 
been fouled (simulation)
•  changes places with the goalkeeper during play or without the referee’s 
permission (see Law 3)

PAGE 106
106
• commits in a reckless manner a direct free kick offence
• handles the ball to interfere with or stop a promising attack
•  commits any other offence which interferes with or stops a promising attack, 
except where the referee awards a penalty kick for an offence which was an 
attempt to play the ball or a challenge for the ball  
•  denies an opponent an obvious goal-scoring opportunity by committing  an 
offence which was an attempt to play the ball or a challenge for the ball  and 
the referee awards a penalty kick
•  handles the ball in an attempt to score a goal (whether or not the attempt is 
successful) or in an unsuccessful attempt to prevent a goal
• makes unauthorised marks on the field of play
•  plays the ball when leaving the field of play after being given permission  
to leave 
• shows a lack of respect for the game
•  initiates a deliberate trick for the ball to be passed (including from a free 
kick or goal kick) to the goalkeeper with the head, chest, knee etc. to 
circumvent the Law, whether or not the goalkeeper touches the ball with the 
hands; the goalkeeper is cautioned if responsible for initiating the deliberate 
trick
• verbally distracts an opponent during play or at a restart  
Celebration of a goal
 Players can celebrate when a goal is scored, but the celebration must not be 
excessive; choreographed celebrations are not encouraged and must not cause 
excessive time-wasting.
 Leaving the field of play to celebrate a goal is not a cautionable offence but 
players should return as soon as possible.
A player must be cautioned, even if the goal is disallowed, for:
•  climbing onto a perimeter fence and/or approaching the spectators in  
a manner which causes safety and/or security issues 
• acting in a provocative, derisory or inflammatory way
• covering the head or face with a mask or other similar item
• removing the shirt or covering the head with the shirt

PAGE 107
107
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 12  |  Fouls and Misconduct
Delaying the restart of play 
Referees must caution players who delay the restart of play by:
• appearing to take a throw-in but suddenly leaving it to a team-mate to take
• delaying leaving the field of play when being substituted
• excessively delaying a restart 
•  kicking or carrying the ball away, or provoking a confrontation by 
deliberately touching the ball after the referee has stopped play
• taking a free kick from the wrong position to force a retake
Sending-off offences
 A player, substitute or substituted player who commits any of the following 
offences is sent off:
•  denying the opposing team a goal or an obvious goal-scoring opportunity by 
a handball offence (except a goalkeeper within their penalty area)
•  denying a goal or an obvious goal-scoring opportunity to an opponent whose 
overall movement is towards the offender’s goal by an offence punishable by 
a free kick (unless as outlined below)
•  serious foul play
• biting or spitting at someone
• violent conduct
• using offensive, insulting or abusive language and/or action(s)
• receiving a second caution in the same match
• entering the video operation room (VOR)
 A player, substitute or substituted player who has been sent off must leave the 
vicinity of the field of play and the technical area.
Denying a goal or an obvious goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO)
  Where a player commits an offence against an opponent within their own 
penalty area which denies an opponent an obvious goal-scoring opportunity 
and the referee awards a penalty kick, the offender is cautioned if the offence 
was an attempt to play the ball or a challenge for the ball;  in all other 
circumstances (e.g. holding, pulling, pushing, no possibility to play the ball etc.) , 
the offending player must be sent off.

PAGE 108
108
 Where a player denies the opposing team a goal or an obvious goal-scoring 
opportunity by a handball offence, the player is sent off wherever the offence 
occurs (except a goalkeeper within their penalty area).
 A player, sent-off player, substitute or substituted player who enters the field of 
play without the required referee’s permission and interferes with play or an 
opponent and denies the opposing team a goal or an obvious goal-scoring 
opportunity is guilty of a sending-off offence.
The following must be considered:
• distance between the offence and the goal
• general direction of the play
• likelihood of keeping or gaining control of the ball
• location and number of defenders
Serious foul play
 A tackle or challenge  that endangers the safety of an opponent or uses 
excessive force or brutality must be sanctioned as serious foul play.
 Any player who lunges at an opponent in challenging for the ball from the 
front, from the side or from behind using one or both legs, with excessive force 
or endangers the safety of an opponent is guilty of serious foul play.
Violent conduct
 Violent conduct is when a player uses or attempts to use  excessive force or 
brutality against an opponent when not challenging for the ball, or against a 
team-mate, team official, match official, spectator or any other person, 
regardless of whether contact is made.
 In addition, a player who, when not challenging for the ball, deliberately  
strikes an opponent or any other person on the head or face with the hand or 
arm, is guilty of violent conduct unless the force used was negligible.
Team officials
 Where an offence is committed by someone from the technical area (substitute, 
substituted player, sent-off player or team official)  and the offender cannot be 
identified, the senior team coach present in the technical area will receive the 
sanction.

PAGE 109
109
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 12  |  Fouls and Misconduct
Warning
 The following offences should usually result in a warning; repeated or blatant 
offences should result in a caution or sending-off:
• entering the field of play in a respectful/non-confrontational manner 
•  failing to cooperate with a match official e.g. ignoring an instruction/request 
from an assistant referee or the fourth official 
• minor/low-level disagreement (by word or action) with a decision
•  occasionally leaving the confines of the technical area without committing 
another offence
Caution 
Caution offences include (but are not limited to):
• clearly/persistently not respecting the confines of their team’s technical area
• delaying the restart of play by their team
•  deliberately entering the technical area of the opposing team 
(non-confrontational)
• dissent by word or action including:
 • throwing/kicking drinks bottles or other objects
 •  action(s) which show(s) a clear lack of respect for the match official(s)  
e.g. sarcastic clapping
• entering the referee review area (RRA)
• excessively/persistently gesturing for a red or yellow card
• excessively showing the ‘TV signal’ for a VAR ‘review’ 
• acting in a provocative or inflammatory manner
• persistent unacceptable behaviour (including repeated warning offences)
• showing a lack of respect for the game
Sending-off
Sending-off offences include (but are not limited to):
•  delaying the restart of play by the opposing team e.g. holding onto the ball, 
kicking the ball away, obstructing the movement of a player
• deliberately leaving the technical area to:

PAGE 110
110
 • show dissent towards, or remonstrate with, a match official
 • act in a provocative or inflammatory manner
• entering the opposing technical area in an aggressive or confrontational manner
• deliberately throwing/kicking an object onto the field of play
• entering the field of play to:
 • confront a match official (including at half-time and full-time)
 • interfere with play, an opposing player or a match official
• entering the video operation room (VOR)
•  physical or aggressive behaviour (including spitting or biting) towards an 
opposing player, substitute, team official, match official, spectator or any 
other person (e.g. ball boy/girl, security or competition official etc.)
• receiving a second caution in the same match
• using offensive, insulting or abusive language and/or action(s)
•  using unauthorised electronic or communication equipment and/or 
behaving in an inappropriate manner as a result of using electronic or 
communication equipment
• violent conduct
Offences where an object (or the ball) is thrown
 In all cases, the referee takes the appropriate disciplinary action:
• reckless – caution the offender for unsporting behaviour
• using excessive force – send off the offender for violent conduct
4. Restart of play after fouls and misconduct
If the ball is out of play, play is restarted according to the previous decision.
 If the ball is in play and a player commits a physical offence inside the field of 
play against:
• an opponent – an indirect or direct free kick or penalty kick 
•  a team-mate, substitute, substituted or sent-off player, team official or a 
match official – a direct free kick or penalty kick
All verbal offences are penalised with an indirect free kick.

PAGE 111
111
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 12  |  Fouls and Misconduct
 If the referee stops play for an offence committed by a player, inside or outside 
the field of play, against an outside agent, play is restarted with a dropped ball, 
unless an indirect free kick is awarded for leaving the field of play without the 
referee’s permission; the indirect free kick is taken from the point on the 
boundary line where the player left the field of play.
If, when the ball is in play:
•  a player commits an offence against a match official or an opposing player, 
substitute, substituted or sent-off player, or team official outside the field of 
play or
•  a substitute, substituted or sent-off player, or team official commits an 
offence against, or interferes with, an opposing player or a match official 
outside the field of play,
 play is restarted with a free kick on the boundary line nearest to where the 
offence/interference occurred; for direct free kick offences, a penalty kick is 
awarded if this is within the offender’s penalty area.
 If an offence is committed outside the field of play by a player  against a player, 
substitute, substituted player or team official of their own team, play is 
restarted with an indirect free kick on the boundary line closest to where the 
offence occurred. 
 If a player makes contact with the ball with an object (boot, shinguard etc.) 
held in the hand, play is restarted with a direct free kick (or penalty kick).
 If a player who is on or off the field of play throws or kicks  an object (other 
than the match ball) at an opposing player, or throws or kicks an object 
(including a ball) at an opposing substitute, substituted or sent-off player, team 
official, or a match official or the match ball, play is restarted with a direct free 
kick from the position where the object struck or would have struck the person 
or the ball.  If this position is off the field of play, the free kick is taken on the 
nearest point on the boundary line; a penalty kick is awarded if this is within 
the offender’s penalty area.

PAGE 112
112
 If a substitute, substituted or sent-off player, player temporarily off the field of 
play or team official throws or kicks an object onto the field of play and it 
interferes with play, an opponent or match official, play is restarted with a 
direct free kick (or penalty kick) where the object interfered with play or 
struck or would have struck the opponent, match official or the ball.

PAGE 113
113
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 12  |  Fouls and Misconduct


PAGE 114
Law
13

PAGE 115
115
13
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 13  |  Free Kicks
1. Types of free kick
 Direct and indirect free kicks are awarded to the opposing team of a player, 
substitute, substituted or sent-off  player, or team official guilty of an offence.
Indirect free kick signal
 The referee indicates an indirect free kick by raising the arm above the head; 
this signal is maintained until the kick has been taken and the ball touches 
another player, goes out of play or it is clear that a goal cannot be scored 
directly.
 An indirect free kick must be retaken if the referee fails to signal that the kick is 
indirect and the ball is kicked directly into the goal.
Ball enters the goal
•  if a direct free kick is kicked directly into the opponents’ goal,  
a goal is awarded
•  if an indirect free kick is kicked directly into the opponents’ goal,  
a goal kick is awarded
•  if a direct or indirect free kick is kicked directly into the team’s own goal,  
a corner kick is awarded
2. Procedure
All free kicks are taken from the place where the offence occurred, except:
•  indirect free kicks to the attacking team for an offence inside the opponents’ 
goal area are taken from the nearest point on the goal area line which runs 
parallel to the goal line
•  free kicks to the defending team in their goal area may be taken from 
anywhere in that area
Free Kicks

PAGE 116
116
•  free kicks for offences involving a player entering, re-entering or leaving  
the field of play without permission are taken from the position of the ball 
when play was stopped. However, if a player commits an offence off the field 
of play, play is restarted with a free kick taken on the boundary line nearest 
to where the offence occurred; for direct free kick offences, a penalty kick is 
awarded if this is within the offender’s penalty area
• where the Law designates another position (see Laws 3, 11, 12)
The ball:
•  must be stationary and the kicker must not touch the ball again until it has 
touched another player
•  is in play when it is kicked and clearly moves  
Until the ball is in play, all opponents must remain:
•  at least 9.15 m (10 yds) from the ball, unless they are on their own goal line 
between the goalposts
• outside the penalty area for free kicks inside the opponents’ penalty area
 Where three or more defending team players form a ‘wall’ , all attacking team 
players must remain at least 1 m (1 yd) from the ‘wall’ until the ball is in play.
 A free kick can be taken by lifting the ball with a foot or both feet 
simultaneously.
 Feinting to take a free kick to confuse opponents is permitted as part of 
football.
 If a player, while correctly taking a free kick, deliberately kicks the ball at  
an opponent in order to play the ball again but not in a careless or reckless 
manner or using excessive force, the referee allows play to continue.

PAGE 117
117
3. Offences and sanctions
 If, when a free kick is taken, an opponent is closer to the ball than the required 
distance, the kick is retaken unless the advantage can be applied; but if a player 
takes a free kick quickly and an opponent who is less than 9.15 m (10 yds) from 
the ball intercepts it, the referee allows play to continue. However, an opponent 
who deliberately prevents  a free kick being taken quickly must be cautioned 
for delaying the restart of play.
 If, when a free kick is taken, an attacking team player is less than 1 m (1 yd) 
from a ‘wall’ formed by three or more defending team players, an indirect free 
kick is  awarded.
 If, when a free kick is taken by the defending team inside its penalty area, any 
opponents are inside the penalty area because they did not have time to leave, 
the referee allows play to continue. If an opponent who is in the penalty area 
when the free kick is taken, or enters the penalty area before the ball is in play, 
touches or challenges for the ball before it is in play, the free kick is retaken.
 If, after the ball is in play, the kicker touches the ball again before it has 
touched another player, an indirect free kick is awarded; if the kicker commits 
a handball  offence:
• a direct free kick is awarded
•  a penalty kick is awarded if the offence occurred inside the kicker’s penalty 
area unless the kicker was the goalkeeper in which case an indirect free kick 
is awarded
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 13  |  Free Kicks

PAGE 118
Law
14

PAGE 119
119
14
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 14  |  The Penalty Kick
 A penalty kick is awarded if a player commits a direct free kick offence inside 
their penalty area or off the field as part of play as outlined in Laws 12  and 13.
A goal may be scored directly from a penalty kick.
1. Procedure 
 The ball must be stationary  on the penalty mark and the goalposts, crossbar 
and goal net must not be moving.
The player taking the penalty kick must be clearly identified.
 The defending goalkeeper must remain on the goal line, facing the kicker, 
between the goalposts, until the ball is kicked. The goalkeeper must not behave 
in a way that unfairly distracts the kicker, e.g. delay the taking of the kick or 
touch the goalposts, crossbar or goal net.
The players other than the kicker and goalkeeper must be:
• at least 9.15 m (10 yds) from the penalty mark
• behind the penalty mark
• inside the field of play
• outside the penalty area
 After the players have taken positions in accordance with this Law, the referee 
signals for the penalty kick to be taken.
 The player taking the penalty kick must kick the ball forward; backheeling is 
permitted provided the ball moves forward.
 When the ball is kicked, the defending goalkeeper must have at least part of 
one foot touching, in line with, or behind, the goal line.
The ball is in play when it is kicked and clearly moves.
The Penalty Kick

PAGE 120
120
The kicker must not play the ball again until it has touched another player.
 The penalty kick is completed when the ball stops moving, goes out of play or  
the referee stops play for any offence.
 Additional time is allowed for a penalty kick to be taken and completed at the 
end of each half of the match or extra time. When additional time is allowed, 
the penalty kick is completed when, after the kick has been taken, the ball 
stops moving, goes out of play, is played by any player (including the kicker) 
other than the defending goalkeeper, or the referee stops play for an offence by 
the kicker or the kicker’s team. If a defending team player (including the 
goalkeeper) commits an offence and the penalty is missed/saved, the penalty  
is retaken.
2. Offences and sanctions
 Once the referee has signalled for a penalty kick to be taken, the kick must be 
taken; if it is not taken, the referee may take disciplinary action before 
signalling again for the kick to be taken.
If, before the ball is in play, one of the following occurs:
•  the player taking the penalty kick or a team-mate offends:
 • if the ball enters the goal, the kick is retaken
 •  if the ball does not enter the goal, the referee stops play and restarts with 
an indirect free kick 
except for the following when play will be stopped and restarted with an 
indirect free kick, regardless of whether or not a goal is scored:
 • a penalty kick is kicked backwards
 •  a team-mate of the identified kicker takes the kick; the referee cautions 
the player who took the kick
 •  feinting to kick the ball once the kicker has completed the run-up (feinting  
in the run-up is permitted); the referee cautions the kicker
• the goalkeeper offends:
 • if the ball enters the goal, a goal is awarded

PAGE 121
121
 •  if the ball misses the goal or rebounds from the crossbar or goalpost(s), 
the kick is only retaken if the goalkeeper’s offence clearly impacted on the 
kicker 
 •  if the ball is prevented from entering the goal by the goalkeeper, the kick is 
retaken
  If the goalkeeper’s offence results in the kick being retaken, the goalkeeper 
is warned for the first offence in the game and cautioned for any subsequent 
offence(s) in the game
• a team-mate of the goalkeeper offends:
 • if the ball enters the goal, a goal is awarded
 • if the ball does not enter the goal, the kick is retaken
•  a player of both teams offends, the kick is retaken unless a player commits  
a more serious offence (e.g. ‘illegal’ feinting) 
•  both the goalkeeper and the kicker commit an offence at the same time, the 
kicker is cautioned and play restarts with an indirect free kick to the 
defending team
If, after the penalty kick has been taken:
• the kicker touches the ball again before it has touched another player:
 •  an indirect free kick (or direct free kick for a handball offence) is awarded 
• the ball is touched by an outside agent as it moves forward:
 •  the kick is retaken unless the ball is going into the goal and the interference 
does not prevent the goalkeeper or a defending player playing the ball, in 
which case the goal is awarded if the ball enters the goal (even if contact was 
made with the ball) unless the interference was by the attacking team
•  the ball rebounds into the field of play from the goalkeeper, the crossbar or  
the goalposts and is then touched by an outside agent:  
 • the referee stops play
 •  play is restarted with a dropped ball at the position where it touched the 
outside agent
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 14  |  The Penalty Kick

PAGE 122
122
3. Summary table
Outcome of the penalty kick
Goal No Goal
Encroachment  
by attacking player Penalty is retaken Indirect free kick
Encroachment  
by defending player Goal Penalty is retaken
Encroachment by 
defending and attacking 
player
Penalty is retaken Penalty is retaken
Offence  
by goalkeeper Goal
Not saved: penalty is not 
retaken (unless kicker is 
clearly impacted)  
Saved: penalty is retaken 
and warning for goalkeeper; 
caution for any further 
offence(s)
Goalkeeper and kicker
offend at the same time
Indirect free kick and 
caution for kicker
Indirect free kick and 
caution for kicker
Ball kicked  
backwards Indirect free kick Indirect free kick
‘Illegal’ feinting Indirect free kick and 
caution for kicker
Indirect free kick and 
caution for kicker
Wrong kicker Indirect free kick and 
caution for wrong kicker
Indirect free kick and 
caution for wrong kicker

PAGE 123
123


PAGE 124
Law
15

PAGE 125
125
15
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 15  |  The Throw-in
 A throw-in is awarded to the opponents of the player who last touched the  
ball when the whole of the ball passes over the touchline, on the ground or  
in the air.
A goal cannot be scored directly from a throw-in:
• if the ball enters the opponents’ goal – a goal kick is awarded
• if the ball enters the thrower’s goal – a corner kick is awarded
1. Procedure
At the moment of delivering the ball, the thrower must:
• stand facing  the field of play
•  have part of each foot on the touchline or on the ground outside the 
touchline
•  throw the ball with both hands  from behind and over the head from  
the point where it left the field of play
 All opponents must stand at least 2 m (2 yds) from the point on the touchline 
where the throw-in is to be taken.
 The ball is in play when it enters the field of play. If the ball touches the  
ground before entering, the throw-in is retaken by the same team from the 
same position. If the throw-in is not taken correctly, it is retaken by the 
opposing team.
 If a player, while correctly taking a throw-in, deliberately throws the ball at an 
opponent in order to play the ball again but not in a careless or a reckless 
manner or using excessive force, the referee allows play to continue.
The thrower must not touch the ball again until it has touched another player.
The Throw-in

PAGE 126
126
2. Offences and sanctions  
 If, after the ball is in play, the thrower touches the ball again before it has 
touched another player, an indirect free kick is awarded; if the thrower 
commits a handball offence:
• a direct free kick is awarded
•  a penalty kick is awarded if the offence occurred inside the thrower’s penalty 
area unless the ball was handled by the defending team’s goalkeeper, in 
which case an indirect free kick is awarded
 An opponent who unfairly distracts or impedes the thrower ( including moving  
closer than 2 m ( 2 yds)  to the place where the throw-in is to be taken ) is 
cautioned for unsporting behaviour, and if the throw-in has been taken, an 
indirect free kick is awarded .
 For any other offence, the throw-in is taken by a player of the opposing team.

PAGE 127
127


PAGE 128
Law
16

PAGE 129
129
16
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 16  |  The Goal Kick
 A goal kick is awarded when the whole of the ball passes over the goal line,  
on the ground or in the air, having last touched a player of the attacking team, 
and a goal is not scored.
 A goal may be scored directly from a goal kick, but only against the opposing 
team; if the ball directly enters the kicker’s goal, a corner kick is awarded to 
the opponents.
1. Procedure
•  The ball must be stationary and  is kicked from any point within the goal  
area by a player of the defending team
• The ball is in play when it is kicked and clearly moves
• Opponents must be outside the penalty area until the ball is in play
2. Offences and sanctions
 If, after the ball is in play, the kicker touches the ball again before it has 
touched another player, an indirect free kick is awarded; if the kicker commits 
a handball offence:
• a direct free kick is awarded
•  a penalty kick is awarded if the offence occurred inside the kicker’s penalty 
area, unless the kicker was the goalkeeper, in which case an indirect free kick 
is awarded
 If, when a goal kick is taken, any opponents are inside the penalty area because 
they did not have time to leave, the referee allows play to continue. If an 
opponent who is in the penalty area when the goal kick is taken, or enters the 
penalty area before the ball is in play, touches or challenges for the ball before 
it is in play,  the goal kick is retaken.
The Goal Kick

PAGE 130
130
 If a player enters the penalty area before the ball is in play and fouls or is 
fouled by an opponent, the goal kick is retaken and the offender may be 
cautioned or sent off, depending on the offence.
For any other offence, the kick is retaken.

PAGE 131
131


PAGE 132
Law
17

PAGE 133
133
17
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law 17  |  The Corner Kick
 A corner kick is awarded when the whole of the ball passes over the goal line, 
on the ground or in the air, having last touched a player of the defending team, 
and a goal is not scored.
 A goal may be scored directly from a corner kick, but only against the opposing 
team; if the ball directly enters the kicker’s goal, a corner kick is awarded to 
the opponents.
1. Procedure
•  The ball must be placed in the corner area nearest to the point where the  
ball passed over the goal line
• The ball must be stationary and  is kicked by a player of the attacking team
•  The ball is in play when it is kicked and clearly moves ; it does not need to 
leave the corner area
• The corner flagpost must not be moved
•  Opponents must remain at least 9.15 m (10 yds) from the corner arc until 
the ball is in play
2. Offences and sanctions
 If, after the ball is in play, the kicker touches the ball again before it has 
touched another player, an indirect free kick is awarded; if the kicker commits 
a handball offence:
• a direct free kick is awarded
•  a penalty kick is awarded if the offence occurred inside the kicker’s penalty 
area, unless the kicker was the goalkeeper, in which case an indirect free kick 
is awarded
The Corner Kick

PAGE 134
134
 If a player, while correctly taking a corner kick, deliberately kicks the ball at an 
opponent in order to play the ball again but not in a careless or reckless 
manner or using excessive force, the referee allows play to continue.
For any other offence, the kick is retaken.

PAGE 135
135


PAGE 136
Video
assistant
referee (VAR) 
protocol

PAGE 137
137
 The VAR protocol, as far as possible, conforms to the principles and philosophy 
of the Laws of the Game.
 The use of video assistant referees (VARs) is only permitted where the match/
competition organiser has fulfilled all the Implementation Assistance and 
Approval Programme (IAAP) requirements as set out in FIFA ’s IAAP documents, 
and has received written permission from FIFA.
1.    Principles
 The use of VARs in football matches is based on a number of principles, all of 
which must apply in every match using VARs.
1.  A video assistant referee (VAR) is a match official, with independent  
access to match footage, who may assist the referee only in the event of a  
‘clear and obvious error ’ or ‘serious missed incident ’ in relation to:
a. Goal/no goal
b. Penalty/no penalty
c.  Direct red card (not second yellow card/caution)
d.  Mistaken identity (when the referee cautions or sends off the  
wrong player of the offending team)
2.  The referee must always make a decision, i.e. the referee is not permitted to 
give ‘no decision’ and then use the VAR to make the decision; a decision to 
allow play to continue after an alleged offence can be reviewed. 
3.  The original decision given by the referee will not be changed unless  
the video review clearly shows that the decision was a ‘clear and  
obvious error ’. 
Protocol –  
principles, practicalities 
and procedures 
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  VAR protocol

PAGE 138
138
4.  Only the referee can initiate a ‘review’; the VAR (and other match officials) 
can only recommend a ‘review’ to the referee.
5.  The final decision is always taken by the referee, either based on 
information from the VAR or after the referee has undertaken an ‘on-field 
review’ (OFR).
6.  There is no time limit for the review process as accuracy is more important 
than speed.
7.  The players and team officials must not surround the referee or attempt to 
influence if a decision is reviewed, the review process or the final decision. 
8.  The referee must remain ‘visible’ during the review process to ensure 
transparency.
9.  If play continues after an incident which is then reviewed, any disciplinary 
action taken/required during the post-incident period is not cancelled,  
even if the original decision is changed (except a caution/sending-off for 
stopping or interfering with a promising attack or DOGSO). 
10.  If play has stopped and been restarted, the referee may not undertake a 
‘review’ except for a case of mistaken identity or for a potential sending-off 
offence relating to violent conduct, spitting, biting or extremely offensive, 
insulting and/or abusive action(s). 
11.  The period of play before and after an incident that can be reviewed is 
determined by the Laws of the Game and VAR protocol.
12.  As the VAR will automatically ‘check’ every situation/decision, there is no 
need for coaches or players to request a ‘review’ . 
2.   Reviewable match-changing decisions/incidents
 The referee may receive assistance from the VAR only in relation to four 
categories of match-changing decisions/incidents. In all these situations, the 
VAR is only used after the referee has made a (first/original) decision 
(including allowing play to continue), or if a serious incident is missed/not 
seen by the match officials. 
 The referee’s original decision will not be changed unless there was a ‘clear 
and obvious error’ (this includes any decision made by the referee based on 
information from another match official e.g. offside).

PAGE 139
139
 The categories of decision/incident which may be reviewed in the event of a 
potential ‘clear and obvious error’ or ‘serious missed incident’ are:
a.  Goal/no goal
•  attacking team offence in the build-up to or scoring of the goal 
(handball, foul, offside etc.)
• ball out of play prior to the goal
• goal/no goal decisions
•  offence by goalkeeper and/or kicker at the taking of a penalty kick or  
encroachment by an attacker or defender who becomes directly 
involved in play if the penalty kick rebounds from the goalpost, 
crossbar or goalkeeper
b.  Penalty kick/no penalty kick
•  attacking team offence in the build-up to the penalty incident 
(handball, foul, offside etc.)
• ball out of play prior to the incident
• location of offence (inside or outside the penalty area)
• penalty kick incorrectly awarded
• penalty kick offence not penalised
c.  Direct red cards (not second yellow card/caution)
• DOGSO (especially position of offence and positions of other players)
• serious foul play (or reckless challenge)
• violent conduct, biting or spitting at another person
• using offensive, insulting or abusive action(s)
d.  Mistaken identity (red or yellow card)
 If the referee penalises an offence and then gives the wrong player from 
the offending (penalised) team a yellow or red card, the identity of the 
offender can be reviewed; the actual offence itself cannot be reviewed 
unless it relates to a goal, penalty incident or direct red card.
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  VAR protocol

PAGE 140
140
3.   Practicalities 
The use of VARs during a match involves the following practical arrangements:
•  The VAR watches the match in the video operation room (VOR) assisted by 
one or more  assistant VAR s (AVARs)
•  Depending on the number of camera angles and other considerations , there 
may be more than one AVAR and one or more replay operators (ROs)
•  Only authorised persons are allowed to enter the VOR or communicate with 
the VAR/AVAR/RO during the match
•  The VAR has independent access to, and replay control of, TV broadcast 
footage 
•  The VAR is connected to the communication system being used by the match 
officials and can hear everything they say; the VAR can only speak to the 
referee by pushing a button (to avoid the referee being distracted by 
conversations in the VOR)
•  If the VAR is busy with a ‘check’ or a ‘review’ , the AVAR may speak to the 
referee, especially if the game needs to be stopped or to ensure play does  
not restart
•  If the referee decides to view the replay footage, the VAR will select the best 
angle/replay speed; the referee can request other/additional angles/speeds
4.   Procedures
Original decision
•  The referee and other match officials must always make an initial decision 
(including any disciplinary action) as if there was no VAR (except for a 
‘missed’ incident)
•  The referee and other match officials are not permitted to give ‘no decision’ 
as this will lead to ‘weak/indecisive’ officiating, too many ‘reviews’ and 
significant problems if there is a technology failure 
•  The referee is the only person who can make the final decision; the VAR has 
the same status as the other match officials and can only assist the referee

PAGE 141
141
•  Delaying the flag/whistle for an offence is only permissible in a very clear 
attacking situation when a player is about to score a goal or has a clear run 
into/towards the opponents’ penalty area
•  If an assistant referee delays a flag for an offence, the assistant referee must 
raise the flag if the attacking team scores a goal, is awarded a penalty kick, 
free kick, corner kick or throw-in, or retains possession of the ball after the 
initial attack has ended; in all other situations, the assistant referee should 
decide whether or not to raise the flag, depending on the requirements of the 
game
Check
•  The VAR automatically ‘checks’ the TV camera footage for every potential  
or actual goal, penalty or direct red card decision/incident, or a case of 
mistaken identity, using different camera angles and replay speeds 
•  The VAR can ‘check’ the footage in normal speed and/or in slow motion but, 
in general, slow-motion replays should only be used for facts, e.g. position of 
offence/player, point of contact for physical offences and handball, ball out of 
play (including goal/no goal); normal speed should be used for the ‘intensity’ 
of an offence or to decide if it was a handball offence
•  If the ‘check’ does not indicate a ‘clear and obvious error’ or ‘serious missed 
incident’ , there is usually no need for the VAR to communicate with the 
referee – this is a ‘silent check’; however, it sometimes helps the referee/
assistant referee to manage the players/match if the VAR confirms that no 
‘clear and obvious error’ or ‘serious missed incident’ occurred
•  If the restart of play needs to be delayed for a ‘check’ , the referee will signal 
this by clearly holding a finger to the earpiece/headset and extending the 
other hand/arm; this signal must be maintained until the ‘check’ is complete 
as it announces that the referee is receiving information (which may be from 
the VAR or another match official)
•  If the ‘check’ indicates a probable ‘clear and obvious error’ or ‘serious missed 
incident’ , the VAR will communicate this information to the referee, who will 
then decide whether or not to initiate a ‘review’
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  VAR protocol

PAGE 142
142
Review
•  The referee can initiate a ‘review’ for a potential ‘clear and obvious error’ or 
‘serious missed incident’ when:
 • the VAR (or another match official) recommends a ‘review’
 • the referee suspects that something serious has been ‘missed’
• If play has already stopped, the referee delays the restart  
•  If play has not already stopped, the referee stops play when the ball is next in 
a neutral zone/situation (usually when neither team is in an attacking move) 
and shows the ‘TV signal’ 
•  The VAR describes to the referee what can be seen on the TV replay(s) and 
the referee then:
 •  shows the ‘TV signal’ (if not already shown) and goes to the referee review 
area to view replay footage – ‘on-field review’ (OFR) – before making a 
final decision. The other match officials will not review the footage unless, 
in exceptional circumstances, asked to do so by the referee
or
 •  makes a final decision based on the referee’s own perception and the 
information from the VAR, and, where appropriate, input from other match 
officials – ‘VAR-only review ’
•  At the end of both review processes, the referee must show the ‘TV signal’ 
immediately followed by the final decision 
•  For subjective decisions, e.g. intensity of a foul challenge, interference at 
offside, handball considerations, an ‘on-field review’ (OFR) is appropriate
•  For factual decisions, e.g. position of an offence or player (offside), point of 
contact (handball/foul), location (inside or outside the penalty area), ball out 
of play etc. a ‘VAR-only review’ is usually appropriate but an ‘on-field review’ 
(OFR) can be used for a factual decision if it will help manage the players/
match or ‘sell’ the decision (e.g. a crucial match-deciding decision late in the 
game)
•  The referee can request different cameras angles/replay speeds but, in 
general, slow-motion replays should only be used for facts, e.g. position of 
offence/player, point of contact for physical offences and handball, ball out of 

PAGE 143
143
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  VAR protocol
play (including goal/no goal); normal speed should be used for the ‘intensity’ 
of an offence or to decide if it was a handball offence
•  For decisions/incidents relating to goals, penalty/no penalty and red cards 
for denying an obvious goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO), it may be 
necessary to review the attacking phase of play which led directly to the 
decision/incident; this may include how the attacking team gained 
possession of the ball in open play
•  The Laws of the Game do not allow restart decisions (corner kicks, throw-ins 
etc.) to be changed once play has restarted, so they cannot be reviewed
•  If play has stopped and restarted, the referee may only undertake a ‘review’ , 
and take the appropriate disciplinary sanction, for a case of mistaken 
identity or for a potential sending-off offence relating to violent conduct, 
spitting, biting or extremely offensive, insulting and/or abusive action(s)
•  The review process should be completed as efficiently as possible, but the 
accuracy of the final decision is more important than speed. For this reason, 
and because some situations are complex with several reviewable decisions/
incidents, there is no maximum time limit for the review process 
Final decision
•  When the review process is completed, the referee must show the ‘TV signal’ 
and communicate the final decision
•  The referee will then take/change/rescind any disciplinary action (where 
appropriate) and restart play in accordance with the Laws of the Game
Players, substitutes and team officials
•  As the VAR will automatically ‘check’ every situation/incident, there is no 
need for coaches or players to request a ‘ check’ or ‘review’
•  Players, substitutes and team officials must not attempt to influence  
or interfere with the review process, including when the final decision is 
communicated
•  During the review process, players should remain on the field of play; 
substitutes and team officials should remain off the field of play

PAGE 144
144
•  A player/substitute/substituted player/team official who excessively shows 
the ‘TV signal’ or enters the RRA will be cautioned
•  A player/substitute/substituted player/team official who enters the VOR will 
be sent off
Match validity
In principle, a match is not invalidated because of:
•  malfunction(s) of the VAR technology (as for goal line technology (GLT))
• wrong decision(s) involving the VAR (as the VAR is a match official) 
• decision(s) not to review an incident
• review(s) of a non-reviewable situation/decision 
Incapacitated VAR, AVAR or replay operator
 Law 6 – The Other Match Officials stipulates: ‘Competition rules must state 
clearly who replaces a match official who is unable to start or continue and any 
associated changes.’ In matches using VARs, this also applies to replay 
operators. 
 As special training and qualifications are needed to be a video match official 
(VMO)/replay operator, the following principles must be included in 
competition rules: 
•  A VAR, AVAR or replay operator who is unable to start or continue may only 
be replaced by someone who is qualified for that role
•  If no qualified replacement can be found for the VAR or replay operator,* the 
match must be played/continue without the use of VARs
•  If no qualified replacement can be found for the AVAR,* the match must be 
played/continue without the use of VARs unless, in exceptional 
circumstances, both teams agree in writing that the match may be played/
continue with only the VAR and replay operator
*This does not apply where there is more than one AVAR/replay operator.  

PAGE 145
145


PAGE 146
FIFA Quality 
Programme 

PAGE 147
147
 The FIFA Quality Programme sets criteria, based on well-founded research, for 
products, playing surfaces and technologies used in the game of football. In 
addition to mandatory quality requirements in some fields of application, 
uniform recommendations are offered in other areas, on the basis of which 
competition organisers can further specify their own regulations.
 Independent testing institutes verify the functionality of the products, playing 
surfaces and technologies in accordance with the respective standard. The 
institutes conducting these tests are subject to the approval of FIFA. The 
following quality marks identify those products, playing surfaces and 
technologies tested and certified to the prevailing requirements:
FIFA Basic*
 The test requirements for this standard are designed to identify products that 
fulfil basic performance, accuracy, safety and durability criteria for football. 
The focus is on setting minimum standards while ensuring affordability for use 
at all levels of the game.
FIFA Quality
 The test requirements emphasise the durability and safety of these products, 
playing surfaces and technologies more than for the FIFA Basic standard. Basic 
performance and accuracy criteria are tested, but the main focus is on ensuring 
extensive use.
FIFA Quality  
Programme 
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  FIFA Quality Programme

PAGE 148
148
FIFA Quality Pro
 The emphasis of the test requirements is on first-class performance, accuracy 
and safety. Products, playing surfaces and technologies with this quality mark 
are designed for optimal performance and use at the highest level.
 For more information on the FIFA Quality Programme, the 
individual standards and the certified products, playing surfaces 
and technologies, visit  
https://www.fifa.com/technical/football-technology . 
 *FIFA Basic is replacing the International Match Standard (IMS). Footballs and 
playing surfaces tested to this previous standard remain eligible for use until 
their certification expires.

PAGE 149
149


PAGE 150
Law 
changes
2023/24

PAGE 151
151
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law changes 2023/24
Law 3 – The Players
•  Clarification relating to extra person(s) on the field of play when a goal is 
scored
Law 6 – The Other Match Officials
•  Reserve assistant referee (RAR) now permitted to assist the referee in the 
same way as the other ‘on-field’ match officials
Law 7 – The Duration of the Match
•  ‘Goal celebrations’ to become a separate bullet point in the list of causes of 
time lost for which the referee makes allowance
Law 10 – Determining the Outcome of a Match
•  The term ‘kicks from the penalty mark’ to be replaced by ‘penalties (penalty 
shoot-out)’
•  Clarification that warnings and cautions for team officials, as well as for 
players, are not carried forward into penalties (penalty shoot-out)
Law 11 – Offside 
•  Clarification of guidelines to distinguish between ‘deliberate play’ and 
‘deflection’ , as outlined in circular 26 (July 2022)
Law 12 – Fouls and Misconduct 
•  Clarification that if the referee awards a penalty kick for an offence which 
involved a defending team player challenging an opponent for the ball 
(excluding holding, pulling, pushing, no possibility to play the ball etc.), the 
same sanction should be issued to the player as for an attempt to play the 
ball, i.e. if the offence stops or interferes with a promising attack – no caution 
(no yellow card); DOGSO offence – caution (yellow card) 
Outline summary  
of Law changes 

PAGE 152
152
Law 12 – Fouls and Misconduct
•  Clarification that the senior team coach present in the technical area cannot 
be sanctioned for an offence committed by an ‘unidentified’ player
Law 14 – The Penalty Kick
•  Clarification that the goalkeeper must not behave in a manner that fails to 
show respect for the game and the opponent, i.e. by unfairly distracting the 
kicker
Video assistant referee (VAR) protocol
•  ConfirmationthattheVAR‘light’systemdoesnotinvolveareplayoperator
(RO)

PAGE 153
153
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law changes 2023/24


PAGE 154
154
 The following are the changes to the Laws of the Game for the 2023/24 edition. 
For each change, the amended or additional wording is provided together with 
the previous wording, where appropriate, followed by an explanation of the 
change.
Key 
 The main Law changes are underlined in yellow  and highlighted in the margin. 
Editorial changes are underlined . 
YC = yellow card (caution); RC = red card (sending-off).
Details of  
all Law changes 
Law 3 – The Players (p. 50)
9. Goal scored with an extra person on the field of play 
Additional text
If, after a goal is scored, the referee realises, before play restarts, that an 
extra person was on the field of play when the goal was scored , and that 
person interfered with play:
 • the referee must disallow the goal if the extra person was:
 ·  a player, substitute, substituted player, sent-off player or team official of 
the team that scored the goal; play is restarted with a direct free kick 
from the position of the extra person
 ·  an outside agent who interfered with play unless a goal results as 
outlined above in ‘Extra persons on the field of play’; play is restarted 
with a dropped ball
 • the referee must allow the goal if the extra person was:
 ·  a player, substitute, substituted player, sent-off player or team official of 
the team that conceded the goal
 · an outside agent who did not interfere with play

PAGE 155
155
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law changes 2023/24
Details of  
all Law changes 
Law 6 – The Other Match Officials (p. 69, 71)
Amended text
Other match officials (two assistant referees, a fourth official, two additional 
assistant referees, a reserve assistant referee, a videoassistantreferee(VAR) 
andatleastoneassistantVAR(AVAR))maybeappointedtomatches.(...)
The referee, assistant referees, fourth official, additional assistant referees and 
reserve assistant referee are the ‘on-field’ match officials.
(…)
With the exception of the reserve assistant referee, the, The other  ‘on-field’ 
match officials assist the referee with offences when they have a clearer view 
than the referee(…)
(…)
4. Reserve assistant referee
The only duty of a A reserve assistant referee is tomay replace an assistant referee , 
or fourthofficial or additional assistant referee  who is unable to continue , and 
mayalsoassisttherefereeinthesamewayastheother ‘on-field’matchofficials .
Explanation
The use of reserve assistant referees has increased significantly, and it is 
therefore logical that they should be able to give the same assistance to the 
referee as the other ‘on-field’ match officials.
Explanation
Clarification that the referee should take action against an extra person on the 
field of play when a goal is scored only if the person affected the play, e.g. the 
Law does not expect the referee to penalise encroachment onto the field of play 
if it does not impact the play.

PAGE 156
156
Law 7 – The Duration of the Match (p. 77)
3. Allowance for time lost
Amended text
Allowance is made by the referee in each half for all playing time lost in that half 
through: 
 • substitutions
 • (…)
 • goal celebrations
 •  any other cause, including any significant delay to a restart (e.g. goal 
celebrations due to interference by an outside agent )
Explanation
Goal celebrations will henceforth be listed separately to emphasise that they 
often result in a significant amount of time being lost, for which the referee 
makes allowance.
Law 10 – Determining the Outcome of a Match (p. 87)
2. Winning team
Amended text
(…)
When competition rules require a winning team after a drawn match (…), the 
only permitted procedures to determine the winning team are:
 • away goals rule
 • two equal periods of extra time not exceeding 15 minutes each
 • kicks from the penalty mark penalties (penalty shoot-out)
A combination of the above procedures may be used.
3. Kicks from the penalty mark Penalties (penalty shoot-out)
Kicks from the penalty mark Penalties (penalty shoot-out)  are taken after the 
match has ended (…); warnings and cautions issued to players and team officials  
during the match are not carried forward into kicks from the penalty mark  
penalties (penalty shoot-out).

PAGE 157
157
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law changes 2023/24
Procedure
Before kicks from the penalty mark penalties (penalty shoot-out)  start
 • (…)
During kicks from the penalty mark penalties (penalty shoot-out)
 • (…)
Subject to the conditions explained below, both teams take five kicks
 • (...) 
 • Kicks from the penalty mark Penalties (penalty shoot-out)  must not be delayed 
for a player who leaves the field of play. (…)
Substitutions and sendings-off during kicks from the penalty mark  
penalties (penalty shoot-out)
The change from ‘kicks from the penalty mark’ to ‘penalties (penalty shoot-out)’ 
will also apply to the following:
 • Guidelines for temporary dismissals (sin bins)
 • Law 2.2 – Replacement of a defective ball
 • Law 3.5 – Offences and sanctions
 • Law 5.3 – Powers and duties
 • Law 12.3 – Disciplinary action
 • Glossary
 • Practical guidelines for match officials
Explanation
 •  The term ‘kicks from the penalty mark’ is outdated and rarely used. Most 
people refer to ‘penalties’ or a ‘penalty shoot-out’
 •  Clarification that warnings and cautions for team officials, as well as for 
players, are not carried forward into penalties (penalty shoot-out)

PAGE 158
158
Law 11 – Offside (p. 94, 95)
2. Offside offence
Additional text
(…)
A player in an offside position receiving the ball from an opponent who 
deliberately playsplayed* the ball, including by deliberate handball, is not 
considered to have gained an advantage, unless it was a deliberate save by any 
opponent.
*‘Deliberate play’ (excluding deliberate handball) is when a player has control of 
the ball with the possibility of:
 • passing the ball to a team-mate;
 • gaining possession of the ball; or
 • clearing the ball (e.g. by kicking or heading it)
If the pass, attempt to gain possession or clearance by the player in control of 
the ball is inaccurate or unsuccessful, this does not negate the fact that the 
player ‘deliberately played’ the ball.
The following criteria should be used, as appropriate, as indicators that a player 
was in control of the ball and, as a result, can be considered to have ‘deliberately 
played’ the ball:
 • The ball travelled from distance and the player had a clear view of it
 • The ball was not moving quickly
 • The direction of the ball was not unexpected
 •  The player had time to coordinate their body movement, i.e. it was not a case 
of instinctive stretching or jumping, or a movement that achieved limited 
contact/control
 • A ball moving on the ground is easier to play than a ball in the air
Explanation
The additional wording clarifies the guidelines for distinguishing between 
‘deliberate play’ and ‘deflection’ based on the expectation that a player who is 
clearly in an offside position should not become onside on all occasions when an 
opponent moves and touches the ball. This wording was published in The IFAB’s 
circular 26 (July 2022).

PAGE 159
159
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law changes 2023/24
Law 12 – Fouls and Misconduct (p. 106, 107)
3. Disciplinary action
Additional text
(…)
Cautions for unsporting behaviour
There are different circumstances when a player must be cautioned for 
unsporting behaviour, including if a player:
 • (…)
 • handles the ball to interfere with or stop a promising attack
 •  commits any other offence which interferes with or stops a promising attack, 
except where the referee awards a penalty kick for an offence which was an 
attempt to play the ball or a challenge for the ball
 •  denies an opponent an obvious goal-scoring opportunity by committing  an 
offence which was an attempt to play the ball or a challenge for the ball  and 
the referee awards a penalty kick
(...)
Denying a goal or an obvious goal-scoring opportunity (DOGSO)
Where a player commits an offence against an opponent within their own 
penalty area which denies an opponent an obvious goal-scoring opportunity and 
the referee awards a penalty kick, the offender is cautioned if the offence was an 
attempt to play the ball or a challenge for the ball;  in all other circumstances 
(e.g. holding, pulling, pushing, no possibility to play the ball etc.) , the offending 
player must be sent off.
Explanation
It is not always clear whether an action was an attempt to play the ball or a 
challenge for the ball (or both). The same principle should apply for challenging 
for the ball as attempting to play the ball. Where the referee awards a penalty for 
a DOGSO offence, the offending player is only sent off if the offence was 
committed without the possibility to play the ball.

PAGE 160
160
Law 12 – Fouls and Misconduct (p. 108)
3. Disciplinary action
Additional text
(…)
Team officials
Where an offence is committed by someone from the technical area (substitute, 
substituted player, sent-off player or team official)  and the offender cannot be 
identified, the senior team coach present in the technical area will receive the 
sanction.
Explanation
Clarification that the senior team official can be sanctioned only for an offence 
committed by an ‘unidentified offender’ who is in/from the technical area, i.e. 
this does not apply to an offence committed by an ‘unidentified player’ .
Law 14 – The Penalty Kick (p. 119)
1. Procedure
Additional text
(…)
The defending goalkeeper must remain on the goal line, facing the kicker, 
between the goalposts, without touching the goalposts, crossbar or goal net,  
until the ball has been is kicked. The goalkeeper must not behave in a way that 
unfairly distracts the kicker, e.g. delay the taking of the kick or touch the 
goalposts, crossbar or goal net.
Explanation
Clarification that the goalkeeper must not behave in a manner that fails to show 
respect for the game and the opponent, i.e. by unfairly distracting the kicker.

PAGE 161
161
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Law changes 2023/24
Video assistant referee (VAR) protocol (p. 140)
3. Practicalities
Amended text
UThe useofVARsduringamatchinvolvesthefollowingpracticalarrangements:
 •  TheVARwatchesthematchinthevideooperationroom(VOR)assistedby 
anone or more assistantVAR s(AVARs)and replay operator (RO)
 •  Depending on the number of camera angles (and other considerations ), there 
maybemorethanoneAVAR or ROand one or more replay operators (ROs)
 • (…)
Explanation
AmendedwordingreflectstheVAR‘light’system,whichdoesnotinvolvea 
replay operator.

PAGE 162
Glossary

PAGE 163
163
 The IFAB – The International Football Association Board
 Body composed of the four British FAs and FIFA which is responsible for the 
Laws of the Game worldwide. In principle, changes to the Laws may only be 
approved at the Annual General Meeting usually held in February or March
 FIFA – Fédération Internationale de Football Association 
The governing body responsible for football throughout the world
 Confederation  
 Body responsible for football in a continent. The six confederations are AFC  
(Asia),  CAF (Africa),  Concacaf  (North, Central America and Caribbean),  
CONMEBOL (South America),  OFC (Oceania) and UEFA  (Europe)
 National football association
Body responsible for football in a country
 The Glossary contains words/phrases which need clarification or explanation 
beyond the detail in the Laws and/or which are not always easily translated 
into other languages.
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Glossary
Football bodies 

PAGE 164
164
A
Abandon
To end/terminate a match before the scheduled finish
Additional time 
Time allowed at the end of each half for time ‘lost’ because of substitutions, 
injuries, disciplinary action, goal celebrations etc.
Advantage
The referee allows play to continue when an offence has occurred if this benefits 
the non-offending team
Assessment of injured player
Quick examination of an injury, usually by a medical person, to see if the player 
requires treatment
Away goals rule
Method of deciding a match/tie when both teams have scored the same number 
of goals; goals scored away from home count double
Football terms

PAGE 165
165
B
Brutality  
An act which is savage, ruthless or deliberately violent
C
Caution  
Disciplinary sanction which results in a report to a disciplinary authority; 
indicated by showing a yellow card; two cautions in a match result in a player or 
team official being sent off
Challenge
An action when a player competes/contests with an opponent for the ball
Charge (an opponent)  
Physical challenge against an opponent, usually using the shoulder and upper 
arm (which is kept close to the body)
‘Cooling’ break
In the interests of player welfare and safety, competition rules may allow, in 
certain weather conditions (high humidity and temperatures), ‘cooling’ breaks 
(usually ninety seconds to three minutes) to allow the body’s temperature to 
fall; these are different from ‘drinks’ breaks
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Glossary

PAGE 166
166
D
Deceive 
Act to mislead/trick the referee into giving an incorrect decision/disciplinary 
sanction which benefits the deceiver and/or their team
Deliberate
An action which the player intended/meant to make; it is not a ‘reflex’ or 
unintended reaction 
Direct free kick  
A free kick from which a goal can be scored by kicking the ball directly into the 
opponents’ goal without having to touch another player
Discretion  
Judgment used by a referee or other match official when making a decision
Dissent  
Public protest or  disagreement (verbal and/or physical) with a match official’s 
decision; punishable by a caution (yellow card) 
Distract  
Disturb, confuse or draw attention (usually unfairly)
‘Drinks’ break
Competition rules may allow ‘drinks’ breaks (of no more than one minute) for 
players to rehydrate; these are different from ‘cooling’ breaks
Dropped ball  
A method of restarting play – the referee drops the ball for one player of the 
team that last touched the ball (except in the penalty area where the ball is 
dropped for the goalkeeper);  the ball is in play when it touches the ground

PAGE 167
167
E
Electronic performance and tracking system (EPTS)  
System which records and analyses data about the physical and physiological 
performance of a player
Endanger the safety of an opponent  
Put an opponent at danger or risk (of injury)
Excessive force  
Using more force/energy than is necessary
Extra time  
A method of trying to decide the outcome of a match involving two equal 
additional periods of play not exceeding 15 minutes each
F
Feinting  
An action which attempts to confuse an opponent. The Laws define permitted  
and ‘illegal’ feinting
Field of play (pitch)  
The playing area confined by the touchlines and goal lines and goal nets where 
used
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Glossary

PAGE 168
168
G
Goal line technology (GLT)  
Electronic system which immediately informs the referee when a goal has  
been scored i.e. the ball has wholly passed over the goal line in the goal
(see Law 1 for details)
H
Holding offence  
A holding offence occurs only when a player’s contact with an opponent’s body 
or equipment impedes the opponent’s movement 
Hybrid system  
A combination of artificial and natural materials to create a playing surface 
which requires sunlight, water, air circulation and mowing
I
Impede  
To delay, block or prevent an opponent’s action or movement
Indirect free kick  
A free kick from which a goal can only be scored if another player (of any team) 
touches the ball after it has been kicked
Intercept  
To prevent a ball reaching its intended destination 

PAGE 169
169
K
Kick 
The ball is kicked when a player makes contact with it with the foot and/or the 
ankle 
Kicks from the penalty mark  
See ‘Penalties (penalty shoot-out) ’
N
Negligible  
Insignificant, minimal
O
Offence  
An action which breaks/violates the Laws of the Game
Offensive, insulting or abusive language/action(s)  
Verbal or physical behaviour which is rude, hurtful, disrespectful; punishable  
by a sending-off (red card)
Outside agent  
Any animal, object or structure, etc., as well as any person who is not a match 
official or on the team list (players, substitutes and team officials)
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Glossary

PAGE 170
170
P
Penalise  
To punish, usually by stopping play and awarding a free kick or penalty kick to 
the opposing team (see also Advantage)
Penalties (penalty shoot-out)
Previously ‘Kicks from the penalty mark ’
Method of deciding the result of a match by each team alternately taking kicks until 
one team has scored one more goal and both teams have taken the same number of 
kicks (unless during the first five kicks for each team, one team could not equal the 
other team’s score even if they scored from all their remaining kicks)
Penalty shoot-out
See ‘Penalties (penalty shoot-out) ’
Play  
Action by a player which makes contact with the ball
Playing distance  
Distance to the ball which allows a player to touch the ball by extending the 
foot/leg or jumping or, for goalkeepers, jumping with arms extended. Distance 
depends on the physical size of the player
Q
 
Quick free kick  
A free kick taken (with the referee’s permission) very quickly after play  
was stopped

PAGE 171
171
R
Reckless  
Any action (usually a tackle or challenge) by a player which disregards (ignores) 
the danger to, or consequences for, the opponent
Restart  
Any method of resuming play after it has been stopped
Restart position  
A player’s position at a restart is determined by the position of their feet or any 
part of their body which is touching the ground, except as outlined in Law 11 
– Offside
S
Sanction  
Disciplinary action taken by the referee
Save  
An action by a player to stop or attempt to stop the ball when it is going into  
or very close to the goal using any part of the body except the hands/arms 
(unless a goalkeeper within their own penalty area)
Sending-off   
Disciplinary action when a player is required to leave the field for the remainder 
of the match having committed a sending-off offence (indicated by a red card); if 
the match has started the player cannot be replaced.
A team official may also be sent off.
Serious foul play  
A tackle or challenge for the ball that endangers the safety of an opponent or 
uses excessive force or brutality; punishable by a sending-off (red card)
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Glossary

PAGE 172
172
Shinguard  
A piece of equipment worn to help protect a player’s shin from injury. Players 
are responsible for wearing shinguards made of a suitable material and of an 
appropriate size to provide reasonable protection, and they must be covered by 
the socks
Shirt  
A garment worn over a player’s upper body as part of a team’s uniform. Apart 
from the length of the sleeves, the shirts of all players in a team are the same, 
except for the goalkeeper, whose shirt distinguishes them from the other players 
and the match officials
Signal  
Physical indication from the referee or any match official; usually involves 
movement of the hand or arm or flag, or use of the whistle (referee only)
Simulation  
An action which creates a wrong/false impression that something has occurred 
when it has not (see also Deceive); committed by a player to gain an unfair 
advantage
Spirit of the game  
The main/essential principles/ethos of football as a sport but also within a 
particular match  (see Law 5)
Suspend  
To stop a match for a period of time with the intention of eventually restarting 
play e.g. due to fog, heavy rain, thunderstorm, serious injury
T
Tackle  
A challenge for the ball with the foot (on the ground or in the air)
Team list  
Official team document usually listing the players, substitutes and team officials

PAGE 173
173
Team official  
Any non-player listed on the official team list e.g. coach, physiotherapist, doctor 
(see Technical staff) 
Technical area  
Defined area (in stadiums) for the team officials which includes seating
(see Law 1 for details)
Technical staff  
Official non-playing team members listed on the official team list e.g. coach, 
physiotherapist, doctor (see Team official)
Temporary dismissal  
A temporary suspension from the next part of the match for a player guilty of 
some/all cautionable offences (depending on competition rules) 
U
Undue interference  
Action/influence which is unnecessary 
Unsporting behaviour  
Unfair action/behaviour; punishable by a caution 
V
Violent conduct  
An action, which is not a challenge for the ball, which uses or attempts to use 
excessive force or brutality against an opponent or when a player deliberately 
strikes someone on the head or face unless the force used is negligible
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Glossary

PAGE 174
174
 Match official(s) 
 General term for person or persons responsible for controlling a football match 
on behalf of a football association and/or competition under whose jurisdiction 
the match is played
 Referee 
 The main match official for a match who operates on the field of play. Other 
match officials operate under the referee’s control and direction. The referee is 
the final/ultimate decision-maker
 Other match officials 
‘On-field’ match officials
Competitions may appoint other match officials to assist the referee:
•  Assistant referee  
A match official with a flag positioned on one half of each touchline to assist 
the referee particularly with offside situations and goal kick/corner kick/
throw-in decisions
 •  Fourth  official  
A match official with responsibility for assisting the referee with both on-field 
and off-field matters, including overseeing the technical area, controlling 
substitutes etc.
 •  Additional assistant referee (AAR)  
A match official positioned on the goal line to assist the referee particularly 
with situations in/around the penalty area and goal/no-goal decisions
Referee terms

PAGE 175
175
 •   Reser ve assistant referee
 A match official  who will replace an assistant (and, if competition rules 
permit, a fourth official and/or AAR) who is unable to continue and who has 
responsibility for assisting the referee with both on-field and off-field 
matters, including overseeing the technical area, controlling substitutes etc.
 ‘Video’ match officials (VMOs)
 These are the VAR and AVAR who assist the referee in accordance with the 
Laws of the Game and the VAR protocol
•  Video assistant referee (VAR)  
A current or former referee appointed to assist the referee by communicating 
information from replay footage only in relation to a ‘clear and obvious error’ 
or ‘serious missed incident’ in one of the reviewable categories
 •  Assistant video assistant referee (AVAR)  
A current or former referee/assistant referee appointed to assist the video 
assistant referee (VAR)
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Glossary

PAGE 176
Practical 
guidelines 
for match 
officials

PAGE 177
177
Introduction
 These guidelines contain practical advice for match officials which 
supplements the information in the Laws of the Game section.
 Reference is made in Law 5 to referees operating within the framework of the 
Laws of the Game and the ‘spirit of the game’ . Referees are expected to use 
common sense and to apply the ‘spirit of the game’ when applying the Laws of 
the Game, especially when making decisions relating to whether a match takes 
place and/or continues. 
 This is especially true for the lower levels of football where it may not always 
be possible for the Law to be strictly applied. For example, unless there are 
safety issues, the referee should allow a game to start/continue if:
• one or more corner flags are missing
•  there is a minor inaccuracy with the markings on the field of play such as  
the corner area, centre circle etc.
• the goalposts/crossbar are not white
 In such cases, the referee should, with the agreement of the teams, play/
continue the match and must submit a report to the appropriate authorities.
Key:
• AR = assistant referee
• AAR = additional assistant referee
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Practical guidelines for match officials

PAGE 178
178
1. General positioning and movement 
 The best position is one from which the referee can make the correct 
decision. All recommendations about positioning must be adjusted using 
specific information about the teams, the players and events in the match.
 The positions recommended in the graphics are basic guidelines. The 
recommended positions are areas within which the referee is likely to be 
most effective. These areas may be larger, smaller or differently shaped 
depending on the exact match circumstances.
Recommendations:
• The play should be between the referee and the lead AR 
•  The lead AR should be in the referee’s field of vision so the referee should 
usually use a wide diagonal system 
•  Staying towards the outside of the play makes it easier to keep play and 
the lead AR in the referee’s field of vision
•  The referee should be close enough to see play without interfering with 
play
•  ‘What needs to be seen’ is not always in the vicinity of the ball. The referee 
should also pay attention to:
 • player confrontations off the ball
 • possible offences in the area towards which play is moving
 • offences occurring after the ball is played away
Positioning, movement 
and teamwork

PAGE 179
179
Assistant referee no. 2
Referee
Additional assistant referee no. 2
Additional assistant referee no. 1
Assistant referee no. 1
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Practical guidelines for match officials

PAGE 180
180
Positioning of assistant referees and additional assistant referees 
 The AR must be in line with the second-last defender or the ball if it is nearer 
to the goal line than the second-last defender. The AR must always face the 
field of play, even when running. Side-to-side movement should be used for 
short distances. This is especially important when judging offside as it gives 
the AR a better line of vision.
 The AAR position is behind the goal line except where it is necessary to move 
onto the goal line to judge a goal/no goal situation. The AAR is not allowed to 
enter the field of play unless there are exceptional circumstances.
Goalkeeper
Referee
Defender
Assistant  
referee
Attacker
Additional 
assistant referee
(GK)

PAGE 181
181
2.  Positioning and teamwork
Consultation
 When dealing with disciplinary issues, eye contact and a basic discreet hand 
signal from the AR to the referee may be sufficient. When direct consultation  
is required, the AR may advance 2–3 metres onto the field of play if necessary. 
When talking, the referee and AR should both face the field of play to avoid 
being heard by others and to observe the players and field of play.
Corner kick
 The AR’s position for a corner kick is behind the corner flag in line with the 
goal line but the AR must not interfere with the player taking the corner kick 
and must check that the ball is properly placed in the corner area.
(GK)
Goalkeeper (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Practical guidelines for match officials

PAGE 182
182
 Free kick
 The AR’s position for a free kick must be in line with the second-last defender 
to check the offside line. However, the AR must be ready to follow the ball  
by moving down the touchline towards the corner flag if there is a direct shot 
on goal.
(GK)
(GK)
Goalkeeper  (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee
Goalkeeper  (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee

PAGE 183
183
(GK)
(GK)
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Practical guidelines for match officials
Goalkeeper  (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee
Goalkeeper  (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee

PAGE 184
184
Goal/no goal
 When a goal has been scored and there is no doubt about the decision, the 
referee and assistant referee must make eye contact and the assistant referee 
must then move quickly 25–30 metres along the touchline towards the halfway 
line without raising the flag.
 When a goal has been scored but the ball appears still to be in play, the 
assistant referee must first raise the flag to attract the referee’s attention then 
continue with the normal goal procedure of running quickly 25–30 metres 
along the touchline towards the halfway line. 
 On occasions when the whole of the ball does not cross the goal line and  
play continues as normal because a goal has not been scored, the referee must 
make eye contact with the assistant referee and if necessary give a discreet  
hand signal.
(GK)
Goalkeeper  (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee

PAGE 185
185
Goal kick
 The AR must first check if the ball is inside the goal area. If the ball is not 
placed correctly, the AR must not move from the position and must make eye 
contact with the referee and raise the flag. Once the ball is placed correctly 
inside the goal area, the AR must take a position to check the offside line.
 However, if there is an AAR, the AR should take up a position in line with the 
offside line and the AAR must be positioned at the intersection of the goal 
line and the goal area, and check if the ball is placed inside the goal area.        
If the ball is not placed correctly, the AAR must communicate this to the 
referee.
1
2
(GK)
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Practical guidelines for match officials
Goalkeeper  (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee

PAGE 186
186
Goalkeeper releasing the ball
 The AR must take a position in line with the edge of the penalty area and check 
that the goalkeeper does not handle the ball outside the penalty area. Once the 
goalkeeper has released the ball, the AR must take a position to check the 
offside line.
(GK)
Goalkeeper  (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee

PAGE 187
187
Kick-off
The ARs must be in line with the second-last defender.
(GK)
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Practical guidelines for match officials
Goalkeeper  (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee

PAGE 188
188
Penalties (penalty shoot-out)
 One AR must be positioned at the intersection of the goal line and the goal area. 
The other AR must be situated in the centre circle to control the players. If there 
are AARs, they must be positioned at each intersection of the goal line and the goal 
area, to the right and left of the goal respectively, except where GLT is in use when 
only one AAR is required. In this case, AAR2 and AR1 should monitor the players in 
the centre circle and AR2 and the fourth official should monitor the technical areas.
AARs
(GK) (GK)
No AAR
(GK) (GK)
AARs
(GK) (GK)
No AAR
(GK) (GK)
Goalkeeper  (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee
Goalkeeper  (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee

PAGE 189
189
(GK)
Penalty kick
 The AR must be positioned at the intersection of the goal line and  
the penalty  area.
 Where there are AARs, the AAR must be positioned at the intersection of the 
goal line and the goal area and the AR is positioned in line with the penalty 
mark (which is the offside line).
(GK)
(GK)
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Practical guidelines for match officials
Goalkeeper  (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee
Goalkeeper  (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee

PAGE 190
190
Mass confrontation
 In situations of mass confrontation, the nearest AR may enter the field of play 
to assist the referee. The other AR must observe and record details of the 
incident. The fourth official should remain in the vicinity of the technical areas.
Required distance
 When a free kick is awarded very close to the AR, the AR may enter the field  
of play (usually at the request of the referee) to help ensure that the players 
are positioned 9.15 m (10 yds) from the ball. In this case, the referee must wait 
until the AR is back in position before restarting play.
Substitution
 If there is no fourth official, the AR moves to the halfway line to assist with the 
substitution procedure; the referee must wait until the AR is back in position 
before restarting play.
 If there is a fourth official, the AR does not need to move to the halfway line  
as the fourth official carries out the substitution procedure unless there are 
several substitutions at the same time, in which case the AR moves to the 
halfway line to assist the fourth official.

PAGE 191
191


PAGE 192
192
1. Referees
Body language
 Body language is a tool that the referee uses to:
• help control the match
• show authority and self-control
Body language is not an explanation of a decision.
Signals
See Law 5 for diagrams of signals
Whistle
The whistle is needed to:
• start play (first and second half of normal play and extra time), after a goal
• stop play: 
 • for a free kick or penalty kick
 • if the match is suspended or abandoned
 • at the end of each half
• restart play for:
 • free kicks when the appropriate distance is required
 • penalty kicks
• restart play after it has been stopped for a:
 • caution or sending-off 
Body language,  
communication 
and whistle

PAGE 193
193
 • injury
 • substitution
The whistle is NOT needed to:
• stop play for a clear: 
 • goal kick, corner kick, throw-in or goal
• restart play from:
 • most free kicks, and a goal kick, corner kick, throw-in or dropped ball
 A whistle which is used too frequently/unnecessarily will have less impact 
when it is needed. 
 If the referee wants the player(s) to wait for the whistle before restarting play 
(e.g. when ensuring that defending players are 9.15m (10 yd) from the ball at a 
free kick) the referee must clearly inform the attacking player(s) to wait for the 
whistle.
 If the referee blows the whistle in error and play stops, play is restarted with a 
dropped ball.
2. Assistant referees
Beep signal
 The beep signal system is an additional signal which is only used to gain the 
referee’s attention. Situations when the signal beep may be useful include: 
• offside
• offences (outside the view of the referee)
• throw-in, corner kick, goal kick or goal (tight decisions)
Electronic communication system
 Where an electronic communication system is used, the referee will advise the 
ARs as to when it may be appropriate to use the communication system with, 
or instead of, a physical signal.
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Practical guidelines for match officials

PAGE 194
194
Flag technique 
 The AR’s flag must always be unfurled and visible to the referee. This usually 
means the flag is carried in the hand closest to the referee. When making a 
signal, the AR stops running, faces the field of play, makes eye contact with the 
referee and raises the flag with a deliberate (not hasty or exaggerated) motion. 
The flag should be like an extension of the arm. The ARs must raise the flag 
using the hand that will be used for the next signal. If circumstances change 
and the other hand must be used, the AR should move the flag to the opposite 
hand below the waist. If the AR signals that the ball is out of play, the signal 
must be maintained until the referee acknowledges it.
 If the AR signals for a sending-off offence and the signal is not seen 
immediately:
•  if play has been stopped, the restart may be changed in accordance with the 
Laws (free kick, penalty kick, etc.) 
•  if play has restarted, the referee may still take disciplinary action but not 
penalise the offence with a free kick or penalty kick
Gestures
 As a general rule, the AR should not use obvious hand signals. However, in 
some instances, a discreet hand signal may assist the referee. The hand signal 
should have a clear meaning which should have been agreed in the pre-match 
discussion.
Signals
See Law 6 for diagrams of signals
Corner kick/goal kick
 When the ball wholly passes over the goal line, the AR raises the flag with the 
right hand (better line of vision) to inform the referee that the ball is out of 
play and then if it is:
•   near to the AR – indicate whether it is a goal kick or a corner kick 
• far from the AR – make eye contact and follow the referee’s decision
 When the ball clearly passes over the goal line, the AR does not need to raise 
the flag to indicate that the ball has left the field of play. If the goal kick or 

PAGE 195
195
corner kick decision is obvious, it is not necessary to give a signal, especially 
when the referee gives a signal.
Fouls 
  The AR must raise the flag when a foul or misconduct is committed in the 
immediate vicinity or out of the referee’s vision. In all other situations,  
the AR must wait and offer an opinion if it is required and then inform the 
referee of what was seen and heard, and which players were involved.
 Before signalling for an offence, the AR must determine that:
•  the offence was out of the referee’s view or the referee’s view was obstructed
•  the referee would not have applied the advantage 
 When an offence occurs which requires a signal from the AR, the AR must:
•  raise the flag with the same hand that will also be used for the remainder of 
the signal – this gives the referee a clear indication as to who will be awarded 
the free kick
• make eye contact with the referee
•  give the flag a slight wave back and forth (avoiding any excessive or 
aggressive movement)
 The AR must use the ‘wait and see technique’ to allow play to continue and not 
raise the flag when the team against which an offence has been committed will 
benefit from the advantage; it is therefore very important for the AR to make 
eye contact with the referee.
Fouls inside the penalty area
 When a foul is committed by a defender inside the penalty area out of the 
vision of the referee, especially if near to the AR’s position, the AR must first 
make eye contact with the referee to see where the referee is positioned and 
what action has been taken. If the referee has not taken any action, the AR must 
signal with the flag, use the electronic beep signal and then visibly move down 
the touchline towards the corner flag.
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Practical guidelines for match officials

PAGE 196
196
Fouls outside the penalty area
 When a foul is committed by a defender outside the penalty area (near the 
boundary of the penalty area), the AR should make eye contact with the 
referee, to see the referee’s position and what action has been taken, and signal 
with the flag if necessary. In counter-attack situations, the AR should be able  
to give information such as whether or not a foul has been committed and 
whether a foul was committed inside or outside the penalty area, and what 
disciplinary action should be taken. The AR should make a clear movement 
along the touchline towards the halfway line to indicate when the offence took 
place outside the penalty area.
Goal – no goal 
 When it is clear that the ball has wholly passed over the goal line in the goal, 
the AR must make eye contact with the referee without giving any additional 
signal.
 When a goal has been scored but it is not clear whether the ball has passed 
over the line, the AR must first raise the flag to attract the referee’s attention 
and then confirm the goal.
Offside
 The first action of the AR for an offside decision is to raise the flag (using the 
right hand, giving the AR a better line of vision) and then, if the referee stops 
play, use the flag to indicate the area of the field of play in which the offence 
occurred. If the flag is not immediately seen by the referee, the AR must 
maintain the signal until it has been acknowledged or the ball is clearly in the 
control of the defending team. 
Penalty kick
 If the goalkeeper blatantly moves off the goal line before the ball is kicked and 
prevents a goal from being scored, the AR should indicate the encroachment 
according to the pre-match instructions from the referee.
Substitution
 Once the AR has been informed (by the fourth official or team official) that a 
substitution is requested, the AR must signal this to the referee at the next 
stoppage. 

PAGE 197
197
Throw-in
 When the ball wholly passes over the touchline:
•  near to the AR – a direct signal should be made to indicate the direction of 
the throw-in
•  far from the AR and the throw-in decision is an obvious one – the AR must 
make a direct signal to indicate the direction of the throw-in
•  far from the AR and the AR is in doubt about the direction of the throw-in 
– the AR must raise the flag to inform the referee that the ball is out of play, 
make eye contact with the referee and follow the referee’s signal
3. Additional assistant referees 
 The AARs use a radio communication system (not flags) to communicate with 
the referee. If the radio communication system fails to work, the AARs will use 
an electronic signal beep flagstick. AARs do not usually use obvious hand 
signals but, in some instances, a discreet hand signal may give valuable support 
to the referee. The hand signal should have a clear meaning and such signals 
should be agreed in the pre-match discussion.
 The AAR, having assessed that the ball has wholly passed over the goal line 
within the goal, must:
•  immediately inform the referee via the communication system that a goal 
should be awarded
•  make a clear signal with the left arm perpendicular to the goal line pointing 
towards the centre of the field (flagstick in the left hand is also required). 
This signal is not required when the ball has very clearly passed over the 
goal line
The referee will make the final decision.
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Practical guidelines for match officials

PAGE 198
198
1. Advantage
 The referee may play advantage whenever an offence occurs but should 
consider the following in deciding whether to apply the advantage or stop 
play:
•  the severity of the offence – if the offence warrants a sending-off, the 
referee must stop play and send off the player unless there is a clear 
opportunity to score a goal
•  the position where the offence was committed – the closer to the 
opponent’s goal, the more effective the advantage can be 
• the chances of an immediate, promising attack
• the atmosphere of the match 
2. Allowance for time lost
 Many stoppages in play are entirely natural (e.g. throw-ins, goal kicks).  
An allowance is made only when delays are excessive.
3. Holding an opponent
 Referees are reminded to make an early intervention and to deal firmly with 
holding offences, especially inside the penalty area at corner kicks and free 
kicks. To deal with these situations: 
•  the referee must warn any player holding an opponent before the ball  
is in play
• caution the player if the holding continues before the ball is in play
•  award a direct free kick or penalty kick and caution the player if it 
happens once the ball is in play
Other advice 

PAGE 199
199
An attacker in an offside position  (A), not interfering with an opponent, touches 
the ball . The assistant referee must raise the flag when the player touches  
the ball .
An attacker  in an offside position  (A), not interfering with an opponent, does not 
touch the ball . The player did not touch the ball, so cannot be penalised.
4. Offside
Goalkeeper (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee
Movement of the player
Movement of the ball
Interfering with play
(GK)Offside
offence
1
(A)
Goalkeeper (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee
Movement of the player
Movement of the ball
Interfering with play
Not offside 
offence
2
(A)
(GK)
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Practical guidelines for match officials

PAGE 200
200
A player in an offside position  (A) may be penalised before playing or touching 
the ball, if, in the opinion of the referee, no other team-mate in an onside position 
has the opportunity to play the ball.
An attacker  in an offside position  (A) runs towards the ball and a team-mate in 
an onside position  (B) also runs towards the ball and plays it. (A) did not touch 
the ball, so cannot be penalised.
Goalkeeper (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee
Movement of the player
Movement of the ball
Interfering with play
Offside 
offence
4
(A)
(GK)
Goalkeeper (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee
Movement of the player
Movement of the ball
Interfering with play
Not offside 
offence
3
(A)
(B)
(GK)

PAGE 201
201
An attacker in an offside position  (1) runs towards the ball and does not touch  
the ball. The assistant referee must signal ‘goal kick’.
An attacker in an offside position  (A) is clearly obstructing the goalkeeper’s line 
of vision. The player must be penalised for preventing an opponent from playing or 
being able to play the ball.
Goalkeeper (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee
Movement of the player
Movement of the ball
Interfering with play
Goal kick
5
(1)
(2)
(GK)
Goalkeeper (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee
Movement of the player
Movement of the ball
Interfering with an opponent
Offside 
offence
6
(A)
(GK)
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Practical guidelines for match officials

PAGE 202
202
An attacker in an offside position  (A) runs towards the ball but does not prevent 
the opponent from playing or being able to play the ball.
(A) is not challenging an opponent (B) for the ball.
An attacker in an offside position  (A) is not clearly obstructing the goalkeeper’s 
line of vision or challenging an opponent for the ball.
Goalkeeper (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee
Movement of the player
Movement of the ball
Interfering with an opponent
Not offside 
offence
Corner kick
8
(B)
(A)
(GK)
Goalkeeper (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee
Movement of the player
Movement of the ball
Interfering with an opponent
Not offside 
offence
7
(A)
(GK)

PAGE 203
203
An attacker in an offside position  (A) runs towards the ball, preventing the 
opponent (B) from playing or being able to play the ball by challenging the 
opponent for the ball. (A) is challenging an opponent (B) for the ball.
An attacker in an offside position  (B) is penalised for playing or touching the 
ball that rebounds, is deflected or is played from a deliberate save by the 
goalkeeper, having been in an offside position  when the ball was last touched or 
is played by a team-mate.
Goalkeeper (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee
Movement of the player
Movement of the ball
Interfering with an opponent
Offside 
offence
9
(B)
(A)
(GK)
Goalkeeper (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee
Movement of the player
Movement of the ball
Gaining advantage
Offside 
offence
10
(B)
(A)
(GK)
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Practical guidelines for match officials

PAGE 204
204
The shot by a team-mate (A) rebounds from the goalkeeper, (B) is in an onside 
position and plays the ball, (C) in an offside position  is not penalised because 
the player did not gain an advantage from being in that position because the player 
did not touch the ball.
An attacker in an offside position  (B) is penalised for playing or touching the 
ball that rebounds or is deflected from a deliberate save by a player from the 
defending team (C), having been in an offside position  when the ball was last 
touched or is played by a team-mate.
Goalkeeper (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee
Movement of the player
Movement of the ball
Gaining advantage
Not offside 
offence
12
(B)
(C)
(A)
(GK)
Goalkeeper (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee
Movement of the player
Movement of the ball
Gaining advantage
Offside 
offence
11 (B)
(C)
(A)
(GK)

PAGE 205
205
The shot by a team-mate (A) rebounds off or is deflected by an opponent to 
attacker (B), who is penalised for playing or touching the ball  having previously 
been in an offside position .
An attacker (C) is in an offside position , not interfering with an opponent, when a 
team-mate (A) passes the ball to player (B1) in an onside position who runs 
towards the opponents’ goal and passes the ball (B2) to team-mate (C).
Attacker (C) was in an onside position  when the ball was passed, so cannot be 
penalised.
Goalkeeper (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee
Movement of the player
Movement of the ball
Gaining advantage
Offside 
offence
13
(B)
(A)
(GK)
Goalkeeper (GK)
Defender
Attacker
Referee
Movement of the player
Movement of the ball
Gaining advantage
Not offside 
offence
14
(B2)
(B1)
(C)
(A)
(GK)
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Practical guidelines for match officials

PAGE 206
206
5. Injuries
 The safety of the players is of paramount importance and the referee should 
facilitate the work of the medical personnel, especially in the case of a serious 
injury and/or an assessment of a head injury. This will include respecting and 
assisting with agreed assessment/treatment protocols.
6. Treatment/assessment after a caution/sending-off 
 Previously, an injured player who received medical attention on the field of  
play had to  leave before the restart. This can be unfair if an opponent caused 
the injury as the offending team has a numerical advantage when play restarts.
 However, this requirement was introduced because players often unsportingly  
used an injury to delay the restart for tactical reasons.
 As a balance between these two unfair situations, The IFAB has decided that  
only for a physical offence where the opponent is cautioned or sent off, an 
injured player can be quickly assessed/treated and then remain on the field of 
play.
 In principle, the delay should not be any longer than currently occurs when a 
medical person(s) comes onto the field to assess an injury. The difference is 
that the point at which the referee used to require the medical person(s) and 
the player to leave is now the point at which the medical staff leave but the 
player can remain.
 To ensure the injured player does not use/extend the delay unfairly, referees 
are advised to:
•  be aware of the match situation and any potential tactical reason to delay the 
restart
•  inform the injured player that if medical treatment is required it must be 
quick
•  signal for the medical person(s) (not the stretchers) and, if possible, remind 
them to be quick

PAGE 207
207
When the referee decides play should restart, either:
•  the medical person(s) leaves and the player remains or
•  the player leaves for further assessment/treatment (stretcher signal may be 
necessary)
 As a general guide, the restart should not be delayed for more than about 
20–25 seconds beyond the point when everyone was ready for play to restart, 
except in the case of a serious injury and/or an assessment of a head injury. 
The referee must make full allowance for the stoppage.
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Practical guidelines for match officials

PAGE 208
208
Notes

PAGE 209
209
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Notes

PAGE 210
210
Notes

PAGE 211
211
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Notes

PAGE 212
212
Notes

PAGE 213
213
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Notes

PAGE 214
214
Notes

PAGE 215
215
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Notes

PAGE 216
216
Notes

PAGE 217
217
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Notes

PAGE 218
218
Notes

PAGE 219
219
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Notes

PAGE 220
220
Notes

PAGE 221
221
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Notes

PAGE 222
222
Notes

PAGE 223
223
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Notes

PAGE 224
224
Notes

PAGE 225
225
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Notes

PAGE 226
226
Notes

PAGE 227
227
Laws of the Game 2023/24   |  Notes

PAGE 228
228


PAGE 229
229


PAGE 230
230
Laws 
of the Game
23/24
Laws of the Game   2023/24